Title:  An Approach to Designing Project-Based Digital Humanities
                    Internships
Volume:  015
Issue:  3
Date:  October 15, 2021
Abstract:  
                This article proposes an approach to designing project-based, credit–bearing
                    digital humanities internships, based on experiences engaging students with
                    digital projects affiliated with the Digital Humanities Institute at the
                    University of North Florida. The author reviews recent scholarship on
                    experiential learning and DH pedagogy, and considers why digital humanities
                    internships are valuable for students, faculty, and institutions. The article
                    outlines three general types of DH internships, providing examples for each, and
                    suggesting possible student learning outcomes and a general course structure.
                    The institutional factors necessary to make such experiences possible are also
                    examined.
                
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                 This article proposes an approach to designing project-based, credit–bearing
                    digital humanities internships. The ideas expressed result from experiments in
                    engaging students with digital projects affiliated with the Digital Humanities
                    Institute at the University of North Florida.The UNF Digital Humanities
                        Institute (unf.edu/dhi) was
                        founded in 2018, following the efforts of the informal UNF Digital
                        Humanities Initiative, established in 2015. UNF is a mid-size regional
                        public institution located in Jacksonville. Fall 2020 enrollment was 17,043
                        (14,662 undergraduates and 2,381 graduate students) . I review scholarship
                    on experiential learning and DH pedagogy, and examine reasons why digital
                    humanities internships are valuable for students, faculty, and institutions. I
                    then outline three general types of DH internships, providing examples for each
                    and suggesing some possible learning outcomes and structures for organizing
                    student work. I also reflect on some of the institutional factors that can
                    contribute to making these experiences possible. 
            

                Context
                
                    Experiential Learning and Internships Across the Academy
                     The concept of experiential learning, as discussed in the academic realm
                        today, derives from the work of John Dewey in the early twentieth century.
                        In Democracy and Education, Dewey defined the
                        dual nature of experience as both action and our reflection upon that
                        action, and pondered the implications of this model for how we learn . In Experience
                            and Education, Dewey further articulated a vision for a new type
                        of education constructed around lived experience and a process of synthesis
                        through which we can discover connections and convert such activity into
                        meaning . 
                     Dewey’s ideas influenced trends at the margins of education in the United
                        States during the first half of the twentieth century , and in the second,
                        informed what would become a major theme in pedagogical theory and practice.
                        The proliferation of scholarship in this period is too great to fully
                        summarize here, but a few key moments stand out. The Cooperative Education
                        Association was founded in 1963, and began publishing the Journal of Cooperative Education the following
                        year .
                        The National Society for Experiential Education was founded in 1971 and
                        began an annual conference which celebrated its fiftieth anniversary in 2021
                            . In
                        1976, M. Keeton edited a volume of essays organized around a model called
                        Cooperative Assessment of Experiential Learning (CAEL), designed to address
                        shortcomings in educational practice .
                        The following year, the Association for Experiential Education was
                        incorporated, and in 1978 began publishing the Journal
                            of Experiential Education
                        . Building on
                        prior work 
                        
                        , D.A. Kolb articulated in 1984 an influential
                        four-stage model for experiential learning, in conjunction with a related
                        taxonomy of learning types . In 1995, R.J. Kraft
                        and J. Kielsmeier published a manual comprised of essays from the Journal of Experiential Education
                        , and J.A. Cantor surveyed
                        experiential practices in higher education . 
                    An emphasis on experiential and project–based learning continues to represent
                        a central tendency. In recent years, Seaman et al. have traced the history
                        of experiential learning theory  and
                        Heilbronn et al. have examined the continuing relevance of Dewey's ideas in
                        the twenty-first century . D. Hutchison
                        has considered the place of experiential activities in online learning , and J.H. Fede, K.S. Gorman, and M.E. Cimini
                        have studied the role of student on–campus employment in the development of
                        transferrable skills . J.Isaak et
                        al. have looked at institutional attempts to expand student access to
                        experiential learning opportunities . L.C.
                        Wang and L.R. Fuller have analyzed the relationship between student
                        motivation and pedagogical outcomes in service learning courses . Coyer et al. have studied the potential
                        for experiential learning conducted locally to contribute to global learning
                        outcomes . 
                    Researchers have also reflected on numerous case studies in different fields.
                        These include Kärnä-Behm in art and design ;
                        A. Nelson in arts management ; E. Nir and J.
                        Musial in criminal justice ; R.
                        Douglas–Lenders, P.J. Holland, and B. Allen in construction ; R.J. Durkin in
                        engineering ; and V. Villarroel et al. in
                        psychology . Among the numerous studies
                        in business are those of D.S. Maguire , L.
                        Valenzuela et al. , D. Finch et al.
                            , and A.L. Leal-Rodríguez and G.
                        Albort-Morant . 
                    In recent decades, scholars have focused on internships in particular. This
                        tendency was signaled by the CEA when it expanded its name in the late
                        1990s, becoming the Cooperative Education and Internship
                        Association .
                        Attention has been paid to matters including the development of partnerships
                        with external entities, internships as a strategy for industry
                            engagement, the assessment of outcomes, and interns' perceptions of
                        their own learning. Scholars including Binder et al. ; M.T. Hora, E. Parrott, and P. Her ; C. Burns and S. Chopra ; and H.F. Sweitzer and M.A. King  examine such questions broadly across
                            disciplines.Swietzer and King's volume on internships, first
                            published in 1999, is now in its fifth edition .
                    As in the case of experiential learning more generally, researchers have
                        considered internships within specific academic areas or professional
                        fields. Such studies include those of S. Stevenson and J. Hannaford in
                        academic librarianship ; A.C.
                        Cuyler and A.R. Hodges in arts management ; W. Haque in computing ; S.M. Zehr and R. Korte in engineering ; K. Weinstein in graphic design ; J.L. Morrissey et al. in kinesiology ; M.H. Sauder and M. Mudrick in sport
                        management ; and S.M. Matthew, R.M.
                        Taylor, and R.A. Ellis in veterinary education . 
                
                
                    Experiential Learning and Internships in the Humanities
                    Compared to the abundance of scholarship in some fields, that which addresses
                        experiential learning the humanities is relatively scarce. This is, perhaps,
                        a reflection of the fact that, as G.R. Ratsoy observes, students in the
                        humanities tend to have less access to such opportunities . It may also be a product of the looser
                        connections — or what are perceived as such — between the
                        humanities and applied work. In many professional fields, designing hands-on
                        experiences for students is perhaps a more straightforward task than doing
                        the same for students whose programs of study do not lead directly to
                        specific areas of practice. 
                    Some studies focus on experiences that engage the communication and
                        problem-solving skills of humanities students, outside the context of their
                        particular fields of study. Ratsoy, for instance, has considered
                        possibilities for humanities students to serve as active participants in
                        experiments related to the scholarship of teaching and learning . S.R. Koendjbiharie has examined the role that
                        humanities students can play in large-scale course-based consultancy
                        projects for corporations . 
                    Other scholarship considers opportunities that relate more specifically to
                        the materials and methods of humanities fields. K. Lucas and P. Radia look
                        at student involvement in extracurricular projects connected to literary
                        studies . J. Oxley and R. Ilea have
                        edited a collection examining experiential strategies for teaching within
                        philosophy . K. de Bruin, L.O. Erickson,
                        and J. Hammadou Sullivan have considered ways that experiential learning can
                        be used to address the pressures that French programs face in today's
                        academic climate, proposing the construction of cross-disciplinary programs with French experiential learning
                            opportunities that can address the demands
                            of students, parents, and administrators, while also staying
                        true to a central mission of those programs by expanding the reach of French literary, cinematographic, artistic,
                            philosophical, and historical education to even more students
                        . 
                    Studies looking specifically at internships within humanities fields are also
                        relatively sparse. Scholars have considered the role of internships in
                        graduate-level humanities education , particularly in a twenty-first century context. For E.J. Balleisen and
                        M.L. Wisdom, internships are one component of an approach to the formation
                        of versatile humanists, whom they describe as
                        being open to interdisciplinary approaches and
                            collaborative projects, curious about new methodologies and analytical
                            tools, and thoughtful about questions of scholarly impact, outreach, and
                            engagement. They point to key benefits for students as being
                            professional networking, resume building, and
                            having a story to tell future employers
                        .
                    Those considerations take place in the context of preparing humanities PhD
                        students for employment in careers beyond academia following the decline of
                        the job market in humanities fields since 2007 . At the undergraduate
                        level, where the great majority of students are bound for professions
                        outside of the respective academic fields in which they have earned degrees,
                        the need for such preparation would seem even more urgent. Scholarly work on
                        the topic, however, is scant. One of the of the most extensive studies is a
                        report produced in 1984 by the Washington Center, with support from the
                        National Endowment for the Humanities and other agencies . Also in 1984, the Washington
                        Center published a Directory of Undergraduate
                            Internships in the Humanities
                        , a resource that does not appear to
                        have been updated or repeated.
                    Paradoxically, perhaps, the most examined intersections between the
                        humanities and the world of work today seem to not deal with experiential
                        learning for humanities students, but rather the benefits of humanities
                        education for students in professional fields, or the incorporation of
                        humanities methods into those fields. Such ideas are prominent, for
                        instance, within business  and
                        psychiatry . The advantages of
                        integrating the humanities into medical education has been recognized since
                        at least the 1980s ,
                        and medical humanities represents an important current within the
                        formation of health professionals today 
                        
                        
                        . Parallel tendencies exist in other fields,
                        including sports humanities
                        . This embrace of the humanities, along
                        with the social sciences, can be seen also within interdisciplinary spaces
                        — like environmental humanities
                         — that are less closely
                        tied to specific professional fields. 
                
                
                    Why DH Internships?
                    The digital humanities have evolved into a space that can provide
                        opportunities for hands-on learning, and in response, scholars in recent
                        years have examined the pedagogical potential of the field. In 2012, Brett
                        Hirsch edited the volume Digital Humanities
                            Pedagogy
                        ; in 2014, CEA
                            Critic devoted a special issue to digital humanities in the
                        English classroom ; and in 2017, Digital Humanities Quarterly published a special
                        issue on digital humanities in the undergraduate curriculum more broadly
                            . More recently, scholars have
                        studied the use of digital humanities to teach within the fields of
                        nineteenth-century literature  and
                        philosophy . Researchers have also examined the
                        relationship between DH pedagogy and publicly funded DH research projects
                            ; the role of library instruction
                        in the teaching of DH skills ; and the
                        intersections between gender , race, and
                        ethnicity  in the context of digital humanities
                        pedagogy. 
                    Within the scholarship on DH pedagogy, a modest amount of work addresses
                        matters related to digital humanities internships in particular. Most
                        commonly, such studies are articulated from a library perspective, a
                        circumstance that is perhaps not surprising given the support within many
                        libraries for DH, as well as the structures libraries often have for
                        employing students. R. Risam, J. Snow, and S. Edwards consider the role of
                        internships in building a digital humanities community based on
                        collaboration between students, academic faculty and the library . S. Morris describes a library–led,
                        six–week summer internship program at Lafayette College, in which students
                        direct digital humanities projects . K. Denda and
                        J. Hunter likewise consider the possible outcomes of student engagement on
                        digital projects within the library .
                        P. Hswe and her collaborators consider two digital humanities internships at
                        The Pennsylvania State University . 
                    Despite the relatively sparse scholarship on DH internships, these
                        experiences offer valuable opportunities for participants. Students in the
                        humanities gain the chance to think differently about their fields and
                        acquire skills that can open paths toward a broad range of professions.
                        Students in computing and related areas have the chance to examine
                        intersections between technology and culture, a process that likewise can
                        influence how they view their studies and future directions. More generally,
                        DH internships can help all students develop their capacities for critical
                        thinking, communication, and problem-solving, as well as time and project
                        management and outreach skills. These experiences can help students to build
                        confidence, gain a sense of achievement, and develop awareness of their own
                        potential. 
                    English major Sarah Dumitrascu summarized many of these benefits in a
                        reflective essay at the end of her internship: Before
                            taking DIG4944 this semester, I had never worked on such a large scale,
                            self-directed project. I think it is easy to take for granted just how
                            pre-planned and structured the majority of undergraduate college classes
                            are — you show up on day one with syllabus in hand, and from then
                            on out, it is your professor dictating your assignments,
                            responsibilities, and deadlines. While some elements of this internship
                            were decided for me (like this reflective essay, for example), the
                            majority of the class’s structure was left up to me. And while I met
                            with my advisor once every two weeks, there were no classes to attend,
                            nor was there anyone to check in on me every time I worked on my
                            transcription. This class has, by far, allotted me the most independence
                            I have ever had in my college career; at times, that felt liberating,
                            and at other times, it made things more difficult. But by venturing into
                            this unknown territory, I have learned responsibility and
                            self-discipline, time and project management, and problem-solving
                            techniques. While my work in this course could certainly lead me into
                            specific academic and professional disciplines, I think that, in a more
                            holistic sense, it has prepared me to be self-directive and successful
                            in a variety of different roles. 
                    
                    While such a process of discovery can have implications for students'
                        long-term academic and professional trajectories, these internships also
                        have more immediate and concrete benefits. Students can highlight their
                        experiences on their resumes and discuss them when applying to jobs,
                        graduate programs, or other opportunities. These internships can also create
                        openings for students to participate in academic and professional events on
                        campus and beyond. Students mentioned in this article, for instance, have
                        recently presented at regional, national, and international conferences
                        including HASTAC , Latin American Studies
                        Association , National Council on
                        Public History , National Humanities
                        Conference , Society for Textual
                        Scholarship , the Society of
                        Southwest Archivists , and a webinar
                        series sponsored by the Florida Digital Humanities Consortium . They also allow students to document
                        their skills through the digital products of their work, as well as through
                        the references their mentors can provide — because of the real-life
                        work relationships involved, faculty who oversee the internships can often
                        write letters of recommendation with a level of detail that is often not
                        possible when a faculty member's knowledge of a student relates mainly to
                        their performance in a classroom setting. 
                    DH internships also hold value for mentors themselves, providing faculty a
                        means to work with students in applied settings, an experience that is
                        routine in many fields but is relatively rare in the humanities. Student
                        collaborators can help faculty leaders discover new angles on their own
                        research, including pedagogical applications that might not previously have
                        been apparent. The opportunity to work with students in this capacity can
                        also influence how faculty view their own roles and potential as educators,
                        developing perspectives that may change how they teach in a more traditional
                        format. These experiences can also provide a means for building
                        relationships with cultural heritage and community institutions, as well as
                        other faculty, whose expertise may be needed to make a particular internship
                        possible. 
                    Institutions themselves also stand to benefit from the promotion of this type
                        of student experience. Colleges and universities today commonly promote
                        their capacity to provide hands-on learning opportunities, and marketing
                        materials frequently showcase images of students in science labs, on
                        construction sites, and in other real-world settings. Because students
                        working in humanities fields are seldom the focus of such representations,
                        DH internships can offer rare opportunities to visualize the applied
                        potential of humanistic scholarship. These experiences also present ways to
                        showcase different types of student-faculty collaboration, as well as
                        external partnerships. When handled properly, these internships can enable
                        institutions to demonstrate their success at putting forth into the job
                        market graduates with broad, diverse skill sets who can engage with ideas
                        and technology in ways that are in demand across the economy. 
                    These experiences can also benefit humanities programs themselves, which, as
                        Lucas and Radia observe, yet again find themselves
                            under fire, this time from government cutbacks and five-year strategic
                            plans that strive to package scholarship as a marketable commodity
                            commercialization of university education. As they argue,
                        programs can find a way to compete in this environment by emphasizing the
                        practical benefits of studies in the humanities: humanities programs stand to gain currency in the contemporary consumer
                            economy if they embrace a more hands-on, creative, and service-driven
                            approach to learning
                        .
                
            

                Three Models
                I propose three basic models for designing DH internships, categorized on the
                    basis of whether two factors — the project and the work involved —
                    existed prior to the involvement of the students in question. I use work
                    here to refer either to labor (tasks to be done) or methodology (an approach to
                    doing those tasks) or both. These hypothetical frameworks are not intended as
                    fixed templates, but rather possible starting points for thinking about how to
                    envision and structure this type of experience. In practice, an internship might
                    combine more than one of these models, or present an entirely different profile. 
                I also illustrate model each with experiences that students completed at UNF
                    between 2015 and 2021. With the exception of two that involved graduate
                    students, all examples were carried out at the undergraduate level. For some of
                    these internships I played an administrative role, as leader of the Digital
                    Humanities Institute (2015-2019)The Institute was known as the Digital
                        Humanities Initiative from 2015-2019, prior to being established as a formal
                        entity. and director of International Studies (2016-2022). For the
                    rest, I served as mentor myself, in my capacity as coordinator of the digital
                    editing projects coloniaLab (2016-present), Editing the Eartha MM White
                    Collection (2016-present), and North Florida Editorial Workshop (2020-present),
                    as well as my role as co-leader of the Viola Muse Digital Edition
                        (2020-present).See colonialab.org, unfdhi.org/earthawhite, nfew.org, and violamuse.unfdhi.org.
                Because my focus is on internship design, not technology, I do not discuss tools
                    when describing these examples. As a general rule, the projects that involve
                    websites employ Omeka or WordPress, both of which are supported by the Center
                    for Instruction and Research Technology (CIRT) at UNF. The digital editing
                    projects discussed use both Omeka and TEI-XML, with the XML files displayed in
                    customized installations of TEI Boilerplate. Any further information regarding
                    tools for a particular project is provided in the notes.
                For the purposes of these internships, I take an inclusive view of what DH
                    means. I include work related to digital projects that may itself not
                    necessarily be digital in nature, such as conducting secondary research. It
                    could also include building websites and managing social media related to
                    digital projects, activities that in many contexts might not be regarded as DH
                    work, but the inclusion of which I believe to be valid in a pedagogical sense. 
                
                    Existing Project, Existing Work
                    A student pursuing an internship is this category has been recruited to work
                        on a project that has a defined existence. The student will receive training
                        in doing something that someone else — most likely the project leader or a
                        previous student intern — has done in the past. An overarching outcome can
                        be defined as the completion of a certain task, or merely the total number
                        of hours required as part of the internship. 
                    Internships of this type offer several advantages. Because the conceptual
                        work is already done, the student in this scenario can focus on exploring
                        and mastering a methodology or a specific technology. Likewise, because the
                        project is already established, this is perhaps the scenario in which
                        students’ contributions are most likely to become part of a lasting, visible
                        undertaking. Depending on the nature of the work and the previous knowledge
                        of students, this potentially is the model that requires the least
                        investment of time on the part the mentor. It is also perhaps the best fit
                        for a student with limited previous experience, as that individual can be
                        trained on discrete, compartmentalized aspects, without needing a global
                        understanding of the endeavor. This is also a situation in which students
                        can be tasked with training their own replacements, thereby creating
                        potentially self–sustaining sequences of interns. 
                    Several students at UNF have pursued internships of this nature with the
                        digital editing workshop coloniaLab. Spanish/international studies major
                        Buddy Delegal, Spanish major Kalthoum Elfasi, and political science/Spanish
                        major Kathlina Brady assisted in the transcription and markup of manuscript
                        from 1799 about Spanish expeditions to present-day British Columbia.
                        Anthropology/Spanish major Teri Wilson and criminal justice/Spanish major
                        Nicole Mills worked together to transcribe and encode part of a print volume
                        from 1690 dealing with the geography of the Straits of Magellan. Ali
                        Alsalman, a student in the Master of Arts in International Affairs, edited a
                        section of the journal of an English voyage to Chile in the the late
                        seventeenth century, a project that history major Marisa Pechillo later
                            completed.For more information on these projects, see colonialab.org These
                            internships took place during the following semesters: Delegal and
                            Elfasi, Spring 2015l; Alsalman, Summer 2017; Brady, Fall 2017; Pechillo,
                            Spring 2021.
                    
                    In some cases, the existing work carried out in this type of
                        experience might involve engaging at a higher level on something that the
                        same student had done previously in the context of a course. International
                        studies/Spanish major Mariana Mendieta assisted in conducting a second round
                        of work on a digital edition of an eighteenth-century legal case in Spanish
                        related to witchcraft to which she and her peers contributed as part of
                        digital-editing-on-site experience in Colombia.This edition is part of
                            the coloniaLab project Antioquia Negra Digital Archive. See colonialab.org/anda.
                            Mendieta's internship took place in Fall 2019. Marisa Pechillo
                        conducted higher-level editorial work and contextual research on the
                        documents related to the history of North Florida that she and her
                        classmates produced as part of a summer digital editing course in
                            English.Pechillo's work can be seen on the website of the North
                            Florida Editorial Workshop, nfew.org. Her internship took place in Fall 2020. In a
                        similar fashion, Amelia Dixon continued the editorial work she and her peers
                        began on the Viola Muse Digital Edition as part of a separate iteration of
                        that same summer course.I co-lead this project with Dr. Laura
                            Heffernan and Dr. Tru Leverette, both associate professors of English.
                            Dixon's internship was in Fall 2021. Her work can be seen at violamuse.unfdhi.org/.
                    
                
                
                    Existing Project, New Work
                    A student pursuing an internship in this category is joining an existing
                        project, but is tasked with adding something new. This could mean
                        conceptualizing, designing, and/or implementing some novel aspect, or merely
                        finding a way to implement a new facet that has been already conceived
                        and/or designed by someone else. In whatever case, this internship involves
                        an element of doing something new, in which the intern cannot be trained by
                        someone already experienced in that exact work, in that exact context. 
                    This second category offers some of the features of the first, while
                        expanding the role of the student. By contributing to an existing project, a
                        participant can reasonably expect that their work will become part of a
                        larger, enduring undertaking. As the student is contributing to some new
                        facet, the work can involve a degree of design and experimentation that goes
                        beyond that which is involved in the first model. A student in this scenario
                        may learn less about the implementation of a specific methodology or
                        technology, but may have more exposure to the creative and project
                        management aspects of digital humanities work. This model may require a
                        higher degree of interaction between student and mentor, and a greater
                        amount of uncertainty regarding the final products of the students' work.
                        Participants in these internships may need help identifying processes and
                        tools that can be used to implement their goals. They might be able to train
                        their successors, who might at that point be pursuing internships
                        corresponding more to the first category. 
                    Two students have completed this type of internship with Editing the Eartha
                        M.M. White Collection, a collaborative project that makes available online
                        the papers of the Eartha M.M. White, a key figure in the African American
                        history of Jacksonville. History major Susan Williams helped to design and
                        implement a pilot workshop series for the project, which had begun
                        previously in the context of an undergraduate course. Williams's work aided
                        in refocusing this endeavor to be not only about building a digital archive,
                        but also experimenting with editing workshops as a mechanism for outreach
                        and project continuity.I supervised Williams's internship, which took
                            place in Spring 2018. The project uses TEI-XML and the edited documents
                            are displayed in an adaptation of TEI-Boilerplate. See unfdhi.org/earthawhite.
                    Building upon Williams's work, history/Spanish major Carol Lynne Hemmingway
                        later completed two internships as student leader of the Editing the Eartha
                        M.M. White Collection. During the first, she created a website, a social
                        media campaign, and interpretive materials for the project, including an
                        exhibit on Omeka . She also designed and led
                        a weekly open workshop series that drew student volunteers from across
                        campus. During the second internship, she developed another Omeka exhibit
                             and organized several virtual workshops
                        and other outreach events.I was her supervisor for both internships,
                            and she also worked closely with Dr. Felicia Bevel of the UNF Department
                            of History, and Susan Swiatosz, head of Special Collections in UNF's
                            Thomas G. Carpenter Library. These internships took place in Spring 2020
                            and Spring 2021. See unfdhi.org/earthawhite.
                    
                    Victoria Farfán Lasso, a visiting student from the Pontificia Universidad
                        Javeriana in Bogotá, Colombia, also completed an internship focused largely
                        on outreach for an existing project. Farfán Lasso built the website of the
                        oral history project Voces y Caras: Hispanic Communities of North Florida.
                        She was supervised by Dr. Constanza López Baquero, associate professor of
                        Spanish, who started Voces y Caras 2012 and whose students contribute to the
                        project each spring as part of a course for Heritage speakers of
                            Spanish.See vocesycaras.unfdhi.org.
                    Pamela Martínez undertook an internship focused both on outreach and
                        organizational development. She assisted in the creation of a website and
                        social media presence for an international scholarly cooperative, the
                        Alliance for Digital Research on Early Latin America (ADRELA). Her work
                        involved corresponding in both English and Spanish with scholars throughout
                        the United States and Latin America.This internship took place in Fall
                            2019. See adrela.net.
                    
                    The internship of Trevor Cheatham, a graduate student in the Master of Arts
                        in International Affairs, concentrated on the creation of project content.
                        Cheatham helped to expand the project Enviro Rights Map, led by Dr. Josh
                        Gellers, associate professor of political science. Cheatham gathered and
                        incorporated material related to the right to water. He developed his own
                        methodology for finding and evaluating provisions related to water rights
                        from the constitutions of nations around the world, and added this
                        information into the site. See envirorightsmap.org.
                            Cheatham's internship took place in the fall of 2017.
                    
                    International studies/political science major Zariah Grant completed an
                        internship focused not on creating new content, but rather organizing and
                        preparing existing material. Grant served as a research assistant for the
                        Viola Muse Digital Edition, under the supervision of Dr. Laura Heffernan,
                        associate professor of English and chair of the Digital Humanities Institute
                        (2019-2021), and Dr. Tru Leverette, associate professor of English and
                        director of the Africana Studies Program. As the first student to contribute
                        this faculty-led project, Grant worked on the cataloguing and transcription
                        of archival materials related to the fieldwork that Muse conducted for the
                        Florida Office of the Negro Writers' Project in Jacksonville the
                            1930s.See violamuse.unfdhi.org.
                    
                    The experience of information science major Rachel Bennett was likewise
                        oriented toward readying existing project content. Bennett assisted in
                        developing and implementing a markup scheme for an interactive edition of a
                        Spanish bibliography of the East and West Indies from 1629. She worked under
                        the mentorship of Dr. Karthik Umapathy, associate professor of information
                            systems.Collaborating with Bennett on this aspect of the project
                            helped me to develop the ideas expressed in a 2018 book chapter. See colonialab.org/epitome1629. This internship took place in
                            Spring 2016.
                    
                
                
                    New Project
                    A student in this scenario has been tasked with conceptualizing, designing,
                        and potentially implementing something entirely new. A mentor provides
                        guidance to help the intern determine the objectives of the project,
                        consider methodologies and tools, make a plan for managing the design of the
                        project and limiting its scope, and aids in gaining access to resources. 
                    As this model focuses on the creation of a new undertaking, the emphasis is
                        likely less on technology or implementation, and more on matters of project
                        development. A finished product, beyond perhaps the creation of an ideally
                        working prototype, is generally not the focus. This model may involve the
                        highest level of mentor involvement, as students must be coached through the
                        difficulties of starting a project from scratch, and may need assistance
                        changing course and revising their plans. This is the model involving the
                        most uncertainty, so the experience must be designed so that constructive
                        failure can be an acceptable result. 
                    This model can be divided into two categories, depending on whether the
                        project has been initiated by the student or by the mentor. By
                            student-initiated, I refer to a project for which the original
                        concept came from the intern, even if the mentor played a role in helping to
                        develop or shape that idea. Conversely, by mentor-initiated, I refer
                        to projects for which the mentor has put forth the original idea, although
                        student collaborators may end up helping to determine the direction of the
                        project in important ways. 
                    
                         Student-Initiated 
                        Internships in this category are often the continuation of student
                            projects that began in a class setting. For instance, English major
                            Sarah Dumitrascu built an experimental digital edition of a selection of
                            an advanced typescript of Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings's 1938 Pulitzer
                            Prize-winning novel, The Yearling, an
                            undertaking she initiated in a summer digital editing course. Her
                            project presents a version that allows the reader to explore Rawlings's
                            revision process by isolating the various layers of typed and
                            hand-written changes reflected in Rawling's draft. To do so, she
                            developed a methodology for identifying and representing visually those
                            different moments of revision.See unfdhi.org/nfew-editions/content/yearling.html.
                                Dumitrascu's internship took place in Spring 2021.
                        
                        In other cases, the project may not have originated in a previous class,
                            but exposure to methodologies in such a setting provided a starting
                            point. Following his experiences in a summer digital editing course, for
                            example, history major Chad Germany developed The Civil War in St.
                            Augustine as part of an internship with the St. Augustine Historical
                            Society Research Library. This digital archive gathers images, letters,
                            poems, and other textual material related to St. Augustine's role as an
                            outpost for both the Confederate and Union armies. Germany worked under
                            the mentorship of Bob Nawrocki, chief librarian at the St. Augustine
                            Historical Society, as well as faculty mentor Dr. Charles Clossman,
                            associate professor of history.See http://sacivilwararchive.com. German's internship was in
                                the spring of 2017.
                        
                        In a similar fashion, exercise science/Spanish major Emilia Thom
                            participated in a summer digital editing course in Spanish, and then
                            developed a project of her own as the basis of her internship. Thom
                            constructed a prototype edition of archival materials related to
                            interactions between colonists and Indigenous groups during the Second
                            Spanish Period in Florida. She selected and transcribed the documents,
                            marked them up, and published them online through coloniaLab.I was
                                Thom's mentor for the technical and editorial aspects of this
                                project, but in order to understand and contextualize the documents,
                                she also worked closely with Dr. Denise Bossy, associate professor
                                of history. See colonialab.org/et-prototype.
                        Another example, but one that does not deal with an editing project, is
                            that of international studies/vocal performance major Sarah Redlhammer,
                            who created a prototype for an interactive map of heavy metal in a
                            global context. Titled Mapping International Metal, Redlhammer's project
                            involved developing a methodology for gathering data that would allow
                            her to visualize the geography of the genre and its movement across
                            borders. She built upon knowledge gained in a GIS course, and received
                            guidance on her project from Dr. Chris Baynard, associate professor of
                            geography and GIS.Redlhammer developed her prototype using ArcGIS
                                in the spring of 2018.

                    
                    
                         Mentor-Initiated 
                        Internships in this category frequently come about when a faculty member
                            recruits a student or students in response to a particular need or
                            opportunity.
                        International studies/Spanish major Paulino Estévez-Ancira and Spanish
                            major Melinda Peacock assisted in creating a prototype for a digital
                            edition of Fernando de Montesinos's seventeenth-century manuscript
                                Ophir de España, held at the University
                            of Seville. Working from a transcription prepared previously by project
                            leader Dr. Nathan Gordon of Adrian College, they translated a section of
                            the document, and marked up both the transcription and translation for
                            online publication. In the process, they also helped to identify
                            shortcomings and oversights in the editorial criteria and project
                                documentation.Dr. Gordon and I supervised jointly these
                                internships, which took place in Summer 2021. Peacock is completing
                                a second internship with the project in Fall 2021, following a
                                similar model.
                        
                        International studies majors Natalie Holland and Christopher Wilson and
                            international studies/Spanish major Sarah Hollingsworth developed Visualizing Refugee Jacksonville, a web
                            resource exploring the experiences of refugee communities in North
                            Florida. They designed objectives for the project and conducted research
                            through oral interviews and use of the participatory method PhotoVoice.
                            They built a prototype website through which to display the visual and
                            textual materials they had gathered, and documented their efforts in a
                            how–to guide for students who might continue this project in the
                                future.See refugeejax.unfdhi.org. These students received support
                                from Dr. Rosa De Jorio, professor of anthropology, and the staff of
                                Lutheran Social Services of Northeast Florida. This experience took
                                place in the spring of 2018.
                        
                        International studies/philosophy major Rebecca Weiner designed and built
                            the Embroidering for Peace and Memory Digital Archive, another
                            undertaking led by Dr. López Baquero. The project documents the
                            embroidery pieces produced by students, faculty, staff, and community
                            members as part of the Embroidering for Peace and Memory project, a
                            week-long annual event at UNF since 2012. Weiner created digital
                            photographs of over 200 pieces, developed a taxonomy for tagging them
                            according to thematic and geographical factors, and built a website to
                            make those materials available.See embroidery.unfdhi.org. This experience took place in the
                                fall of 2017. International studies/Spanish major Angelic
                            Fleites later worked with Dr. López Baquero to develop a social media
                            campaign for this project, based in part on Weiner's work. 
                    
                
                
                    General Observations
                    Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, the question of delivery method did not arise
                        for these internships. Experience has shown, however, that any of these
                        models can work in a virtual format. Seven of the example internships
                        discussed — those of Dixon, Dumitrascu, Estévez-Ancira, Grant,
                        Hemmingway, Peacock and Pechillo — have been completely virtual due to
                        the restrictions imposed in response to the pandemic.Hemmingway's
                            first internship in Spring 2020 was not remote initially, but
                            transitioned to a remote format when the campus closed in
                            mid-March. The internships of Dixon, Dumitrascu, Pechillo, and
                        Peacock, in fact, took place before I ever met those students in person.
                    Most of the examples mentioned here involved a UNF faculty member as
                        supervisor, but these models can function for opportunities based also
                        beyond the campus. For instance, the experiences of Germany; Holland,
                        Hollingsworth, and Wilson; and Estévez-Ancira and Peacock, all involved
                        supervision by mentors or advisors both at UNF and other institutions. 
                    Regardless of the model employed, having students work in teams can often be
                        a good strategy. This was the case with Mills and Wilson; Holland,
                        Hollingsworth and Wilson; and Estévez-Ancira and Peacock. In all instances,
                        the students were responsible for different materials and tasks, but they
                        were able to assist each other in generating ideas, formulating questions,
                        solving problems, and ensuring the accuracy of their work.
                
            

                Logistical Aspects
                
                    Outcomes
                    Because all these models share characteristics, some general learning
                        objectives can apply to all. These relate to communication skills,
                        cross–disciplinary engagement, teamwork, and collaboration, as well as
                        reflecting critically and constructively on successes and failures. Some
                        examples include the following: 
                            explain project goals, 
                            solve problems through research, experimentation and
                                collaboration, 
                            report accurately on time spent by task, 
                            assess strengths and weaknesses of work produced, and 
                            articulate personal impact of learning experience orally and in
                                writing.
                        
                    
                    Objectives specific to the differing models can also be identified. To do so,
                        we can regard the three models as representing a spectrum. At one end is
                        Model 1, which focuses on the application of specific methodologies in the
                        context of an existing endeavor. Objectives in this context may deal more
                        with the development of particular skills. Desired outcomes might include
                        the ability to do the following: 
                            analyze historical or social context of materials under
                                consideration, 
                            explain project methodologies, 
                            apply project methodologies in processing of materials under
                                consideration, 
                            identify problems discovered in the application of project
                                methodologies, and 
                            propose ways to improve project processes.
                        
                    
                    In the middle, Model 2 is grounded in an existing project, but also involves
                        tasks related to design and process management with respect to a specific
                        aspect or feature. In this case, appropriate goals for learning might
                        balance the attainment of particular skills with creative and critical
                        abilities. Some possible outcomes might be to: 
                            identify a problem to be solved, 
                            describe a potential solution, 
                            indicate appropriate tools and methodologies, 
                            articulate a work plan, 
                            develop a proof-of-concept prototype, 
                            critique that prototype, 
                            implement proposed changes, 
                            analyze results, and 
                            determine next steps.
                        
                    
                    At the other extreme, Model 3 emphasizes the design of something entirely new
                        and the management of related processes. In this case, desired outcomes
                        might be more oriented toward the development of capacities for creative
                        thinking and project solving. These might include the following: 
                            select materials to be examined, 
                            identify questions to be answered in relation to those materials, 
                            design an approach to answering such questions, 
                            indicate appropriate tools and methodologies, 
                            articulate a work plan, 
                            develop a proof-of-concept prototype, 
                            critique that prototype, and 
                            determine next steps.
                        
                    
                

                
                    Semester Structure
                    The implementation of these internship models allows for flexibility and will
                        vary by the nature of the project. With that in mind, I offer here a general
                        structure that can be used as a point of
                        departure.
                    For each internship model, at least one preliminary meeting prior to the
                        beginning of the semester is needed to plan, set expectations, and handle
                        any necessary paperwork. In all cases, the initial week can be an
                        orientation period, which may involve more meetings for planning and
                        training. The bulk of the semester can be organized into work time,
                        punctuated by the completion of timesheets and weekly or biweekly status
                        reports and meetings. The final weeks of the semester in each case should be
                        dedicated to finalizing the students’ work, as appropriate, and reflecting
                        on their students’ accomplishments and learning. 
                    The following is a possible structure for the three types of internships.
                        Because many aspects of the three models are identical, the distinguishing
                        features of each are highlighted in bold. This outline assumes a 15-week
                        semester, and so will need to be adjusted for terms of differing lengths. 
                    
                        
                            
                             Model 1 
                             Model 2 
                             Model 3 
                        

                        
                            Before semester
                             A preliminary meeting to discuss internship, provide initial orientation
                                to project, set schedule for meetings and deadlines, discuss
                                timesheets, status reports, etc., and sign agreement. 
                             A preliminary meeting to discuss internship, provide initial orientation
                                to project, set schedule for meetings and deadlines, discuss
                                timesheets, status reports, etc., and sign agreement; also, a preliminary brainstorming/design
                                    meeting. 
                             A preliminary meeting to discuss internship, provide initial orientation
                                to project, set schedule for meetings and deadlines, discuss
                                timesheets, status reports, etc., and sign agreement; also, a preliminary brainstorming/design
                                    meeting
                            
                        

                        
                             Week 1 
                             Orientation to project, training session(s)
                            
                             Orientation to project, brainstorming/design
                                    session(s)
                            
                             Orientation to project, brainstorming/design
                                    session(s)
                            
                        
                        
                             Weeks 2–12
                            Training, as needed; weekly or bi–weekly timesheets, status
                                reports, and/or status meetings. Weeks 10–12: focus
                                    on refinement and proofing of work. 
                             Training, as needed; weekly or bi–weekly timesheets, status
                                reports, and/or status meetings. Items due: week 3,
                                    plan or proposal; week 6, initial prototype; week 9, revised
                                    prototype; week 12, second revised prototype. 
                             Training, as needed; weekly or bi–weekly timesheets, status
                                reports, and/or status meetings. Items due: week 3,
                                    plan or proposal; week 6, initial prototype; week 9, revised
                                    prototype; week 12, second revised prototype. 
                        
                        
                             Weeks 13-15 
                             Final timesheet, completed work, reflective paper. Possibly:
                                public presentation, recruitment and training of successor. 
                             Final timesheet, completed work, reflective paper. Possibly:
                                public presentation, recruitment and training of successor (if development of this aspect of project to
                                    continue). 
                             Final timesheet, completed work, reflective paper. Possibly:
                                public presentation, recruitment and training of successor (if project to become ongoing). 
                        
                    
                    As suggested by this outline, the items to be delivered by students in these
                        internships can vary, depending on the type. Most commonly, however,
                        students will be producing proposals; periodic reports and/or learning
                        journals; prototypes, possibly in various stages; and reflective
                            papers.The assignment for a final reflections can be tailored to a
                            specific internship, but I have found a general, open-ended prompt like
                            the following works well: Submit a reflective paper
                                of 4-5 double-spaced pages addressing the following questions (in
                                essay, not question-and-answer format): What did you learn during
                                this experience? How has this experience impacted your future
                                academic or professional plans? You're also welcome to include
                                anything else you think is important as you look back on the work
                                you've done this semester. Tasks that might take
                        place towards the end of the semester include public presentations and
                        assistance in recruiting and training students to continue project work in a
                        subsequent semester. 
                    Ideally, the interns themselves can play a role in determining the structure
                        of the semester. Some requirements may apply in all cases, such as the
                        completion of a given number of hours and the submission of final
                        reflections. Many other aspects of what the intern does and how they do it
                        could be decided collaboratively. 
                
                
                    Institutional Factors
                    In order to offer digital humanities internships, several questions must be
                        answered in terms of administrative structure and process. Needs will vary
                        according to the circumstances of different institutions, but a few
                        considerations generally apply. 
                    A mechanism must be in place for awarding academic credit. In some cases, a
                        student may be able to complete a digital humanities internship through a
                        discipline–specific internship course. This may not be a solution for
                        students in all majors, however, and relying on departmental areas to
                        facilitate these experiences for an interdisciplinary community of students
                        can be problematic. A digital humanities internship course that is not tied
                        to or administered by one specific area can therefore be advantageous. 
                    Students need a way to count that course toward a program of study. This
                        could be a traditional major in a disciplinary area, and in such a case, the
                        discipline–specific internship course, if one exists, is likely already
                        included as an elective. In the case of a digital humanities internship
                        course, however, the situation may be more complex. If a digital humanities
                        major or minor exists, the digital humanities internship course will almost
                        certainly count toward those programs of study. In some instances,
                        traditional departments may agree to honor the digital humanities internship
                        course also as an elective toward their degrees, although likely on a
                        case-by-case basis. Ideally, students could double–count such a course
                        between a traditional major or minor and a digital humanities major or
                            minor.Some students may also be able to utilize the internship to
                            meet requirements that are not part of a program of study. Four of the
                            students mentioned here — Brady, Peacock, Pechillo, and Thom
                            — completed their internships not only for credit, but also in
                            fulfillment of the capstone requirement for the Hicks Honors College at
                            UNF.
                    
                    Thirdly, a system must exist through which students can propose or apply for
                        these internships, and upon approval, receive the needed registration
                        permissions. If the internship occurs within a disciplinary area, this will
                        likely be done through whatever processes are already in place. In the case
                        of a digital humanities internship course that is not discipline-specific,
                        however, such a system may need to be centralized. The responsible
                        individual could be the coordinator of digital humanities minor or major, or
                        the director of a digital humanities center or institute. 
                    Funding for interns is desirable, particularly in situations in which the
                        student's work can be understood as labor for a project owned by someone
                        else. This will generally be true in all cases except possibly the
                        student-initiated projects under Model 3. As UCLA’s Digital Humanities
                        program states in A Student Collaborators' Bill of Rights, receiving
                        academic credit for work on digital projects is not adequate: Course credit is generally not sufficient payment
                            for students’ time, since courses are designed to provide students with
                            learning experiences
                        . 
                    To some extent, however, this depends on the nature of the work and the role
                        of a given student. UCLA’s statement frames the issue as follows: As a general principle, a student must be paid for his or
                            her time if he or she is not empowered to make critical decisions about
                            the intellectual design of a project or a portion of a project (and
                            credited accordingly). Students should not perform mechanical labor,
                            such as data-entry or scanning, without pay
                        . Model 1 might involve a student
                        doing tasks that could be understood to be mechanical, though such
                        activities arguably correspond more to a paid student assistant position,
                        not an internship (paid or otherwise) involving academic credit. In general,
                        the internships contemplated in this article are of a nature in which
                        students are regarded as collaborators, not employees, and the power to make
                        decisions is a basic part of that role. This distinction notwithstanding,
                        helping students secure funding to support their internships will seldom be
                        an inappropriate or superfluous act on the part of the mentor or a digital
                        humanities center, institute, or program.Six of the students mentioned
                            in this article have been awarded grants through the Office of
                            Undergraduate Research. Four have also received funds through a
                            fellowship program operated by the Hicks Honors College. One was awarded
                            a departmental scholarship.
                    
                    Regardless of the ability to fund students' work, a commitment should exist
                        among project leaders to properly credit those efforts. As the 2011
                        Collaborators’ Bill of Rights states this matter: All
                            kinds of work on a project are equally deserving of credit (though the
                            amount of work and expression of credit may differ). Beyond
                        being a question of fairness with respect to individual students, such a
                        stance has larger implications, as acknowledging and celebrating student
                        contributions can be a central factor in building dynamic DH communities
                            . 
                    Having on-campus forums in which students can present their work is also
                        beneficial. At UNF, the Digital Humanities Institute sponsors a Digital
                        Project Showcase towards the end of each fall semester, and SOARS, the
                        campus-wide undergraduate research symposium takes place at the conclusion
                        of each spring semester.SOARS stands for Showcase of Osprey
                            Advancements in Research and Scholarship. Nearly all of the
                        interns mentioned in this article have discussed their experiences at one or
                        both of these events.
                    A system for compensating faculty mentors, or otherwise incentivizing their
                        participation, is beneficial. Such compensation might take take the form of
                        a stipend or release time, perhaps after mentoring a given number of
                        students. The possible options must, of course, be dictated by the
                        particular circumstances of each institution.If additional
                            compensation or release time are not options, one possibility might be
                            to frame the internships of a full cohort of students as a studio
                            course, with one faculty member serving as instructor of record within
                            their normal teaching load. Such an approach will depend, of course, on
                            the viability of attaining a sufficient number of students to adequately
                            enroll such a course. While this strategy may solve an administrative
                            problem, however, it may also create another of a pedagogical nature, as
                            in this scenario the instructor of record would likely function as
                            mentor to all the students. Such an individual would need to have a
                            broad range of expertise to mentor a truly interdisciplinary group of
                            students.
                    
                    At a minimum, an institution hoping to enable this type of student experience
                        must express formal support for interdisciplinary mentorship. Faculty who
                        are subject to tenure and promotion otherwise risk being seen as not
                        contributing adequately to their own areas, particularly when they find
                        themselves working with students from other majors. Legitimizing such
                        activity through explicit support in departmental bylaws and university
                        statutes, as well as collective bargaining agreements, as appropriate, is
                        an important step toward creating the types of cross-disciplinary spaces
                        needed to facilitate internships like those discussed here. 
                
            

                Conclusion
                The internship model described in this paper promises a broad range of benefits
                    for students. Participants can gain technical skills and a deeper understanding
                    of methodologies used to ask questions and solve problems in a variety of
                    fields. These opportunities provide a way to develop abilities related to
                    critical thinking, planning, organization, and communication skills. Students
                    can include these experiences on their resumes, and can discuss them in concrete
                    ways when applying to jobs or graduate programs. 
                Faculty likewise can benefit from their role in mentoring digital humanities
                    internships for students. Many will be able to involve students in digital
                    projects related to their own research. Such collaborations can allow faculty to
                    see their work from new perspectives, and can give their research greater
                    visibility on campus. These experiences can also alter how faculty approach
                    teaching in a more traditional classroom setting. 
                In a similar fashion, institutional units — programs, departments, colleges, and
                    universities themselves — stand to benefit from having students engaged in
                    digital humanities internships. These experiences create avenues for
                    collaboration across disciplinary lines, resulting in experiences that can have
                    implications for faculty satisfaction, the development of creative new
                    initiatives, the overall quality of education, and the employability of
                    graduates. These internships can provide opportunities for administrators to
                    showcase the creativity and talent of students and faculty, and the quality of
                    student/faculty interactions. 
                Even the most hospitable of institutional settings will likely present
                    challenges to be overcome when attempting to offer opportunities of this sort.
                    However, the model described here can be deployed on a trial basis without
                    significant resources or administrative support. A small community of core
                    faculty can experiment with offering digital humanities internships in a way
                    that can attract attention and create greater momentum. The effort and risk
                    involved may be justified, as the potential benefits are many. Students, faculty,
                    and institutions all stand to gain from the implementation of experiential,
                    project–based learning opportunities within the context of digital humanities
                    research. 
            

                 Acknowledgements 
                For their help in making the reflections in this article possible, the author
                    would like to thank the following: Ali Alsalman, Dr. Chris Baynard, Rachel
                    Bennett, Dr. Felicia Bevel, Dr. Alan Bliss, Dr. Denise Bossy, Kathlina Brady,
                    Dr. Keith Cartwright, Trevor Cheatham, Dr. Charles Clossmann, Dr. Karen Cousins,
                    Dr. Rosa De Jorio, Buddy Delegal, Amelia Dixon, Sarah Dumitrascu, Kalthoum
                    Elfasi, Paulino Estévez-Ancira, Victoria Farfán Lasso, Angelic Fleites, Dr. Josh
                    Gellers, Dr. Patricia Geesey, Chad Germany, Dr. Nathan Gordon, Zariah Grant, Dr.
                    Laura Heffernan, Dr. Gregory Helmick, Carol Lynne Hemmingway, Natalie Holland,
                    Sarah Hollingsworth, Dr. Tru Leverette, Dr. Constanza López Baquero, Pamela
                    Martínez, Mariana Mendieta, Nicole Mills, Bob Nawrocki, Melinda Peacock, Marisa
                    Pechillo, Dr. Anne Pfister, Sarah Redlhammer, Andy Rush, Dr. David Sheffler,
                    Susan Swiatosz, Emilia Thom, Dr. Karthik Umapathy, Rebecca Weiner, Susan
                    Williams, Chris Wilson, and Teri Wilson. The internships described here could
                    not have happened without support from the Jacksonville Historical Society, St.
                    Augustine Historical Society Research Library, and the Refugee Services Program
                    of Lutheran Social Services of Northeast Florida, as well as the following units
                    at UNF: the Division of Academic Affairs; the College of Arts and Sciences; the
                    Digital Humanities Institute; the Department of English; the Department of
                    History; the Department of Languages, Literatures and Cultures; the School of
                    Computing; the Center for Instruction and Research Technology (CIRT); the Thomas
                    G. Carpenter Library; the Office of Undergraduate Research; the Center for
                    Community-Based Learning; and the Hicks Honors College. 
            
