Title:  Heterochronologies: a platform for
					correlation and research in temporal graphics
Volume:  016
Issue:  3
Date:  29 June 2022
Abstract:  
				
				The difficulty of integrating the data, metadata, and classification schemes
					produced across a wide geographic, historical, and cultural variety of
					institutional sites and practices was a major impetus for the creation of
					Linked Data (LD). The promise was to make diverse sets of data
					interoperable through subscription to an array of standardizations while
					leaving the original data intact. These operational requirements enable
					interoperability at the expense of specificity, and require considerable
					resources for implementation. While LD supports connection and access
					across disparate data sets, it is not focused on the intellectual issues
					that have to do with enabling the correlation and comparison of diverse
					ontologies, or preserving and exploring their epistemic and cultural
					specificity — issues essential to humanistic study. In addition, LD is
					exclusively concerned with linguistic data, and can hence not be applied to
					information that is expressed in graphical form. Contrastingly, the
					Heterochronologies project regards temporality as a concept expressed
					epistemically through various culturally-specific, authoritative
					ontologies, which are instantiated by graphical representations such as
					chronologies and timelines. The project concentrates on extracting
					computationally tractable structured data from historical images so that
					the underlying ontologies may be compared without subsuming them into a
					hegemonic data model. In this sense, the Heterochronologies project is an
					exercise in comparative ontology. 
				In this paper we describe the factors that motivated the project; its various
					epistemological underpinnings, as well as the methodological approach that
					guided its development; the phases of our work; and the contributions that
					emerged from the project. Though currently still in development, its
					culmination is a digital platform — the Time Capsule — that supports
					comparative pedagogy, and in so doing demonstrates both validity and
					relevance of a few fundamental notions: a) structured data can be
					systematically extracted from graphical structures with a logical approach;
					b) comparisons of temporal schemes can be supported by a digital platform
					that considers them as instantiations of ontologies that need not be
					reconciled to a single standard; c) the historical and cultural specificity
					of these ontologies can be exposed and analyzed using digital means.
			
Full Body Text: 


				Project Overview
				Structured data in graphical formats present certain challenges for
					computational systems rooted in language (Semantic Web) and metrics
					(quantitative data); and yet, many forms of information are expressed in
					graphical form as instantiations of ontologies that originate from specific
					cultural values and points of view. The history of graphic expressions for
					time-keeping stretches from early tallies of the phases of the moon to
					current automated systems for tracking temporal phenomena at nano-to-macro
					scales; these temporal records often serve practical purposes, but they
					also encode belief systems. This is reflected in the sequential cycles of
					the Mayan Long Count calendar and the Judeo-Christian tradition of
					dividing time into periods before and after the birth of
					Christ. In Western culture, Biblical chronologies dominated representations
					of human history until the advent of deep time, which was introduced
					by James Hutton and others in the late 18th century as part of the emerging
					science of geology. Hutton inherited a time scale that had been in place
					from late antiquity, codified through such widely-used references as the
					work of Bishop James Ussher. In his radical extension of time’s scale,
					Hutton altered the ideological as well as metrical frameworks for
					historical understanding. The graphical formats in which these schemes are
					expressed are structured data, but do not readily lend themselves to direct
					processing by computational means.
				For research that acknowledges these historical shifts in understanding and
					representing time, identifying which chronologies adhere to a scientific
					understanding of time is not the main concern. Every graphical expression
					of a chronological scheme is historical evidence of a descriptive system,
					which is useful to scholarship concerned with how time has been conceived
					in particular historical contexts. Though geology requires a different
					chronological framework than that of Dakota Winter Counts or early Roman
					calendar systems, each of these schemes expresses culturally specific
					understandings and epistemologies of chronology which demonstrate unique
					approaches to accounting for chronological events. Respect for the
					specificity of these schemes and for the cultural otherness of diverse past
					and present viewpoints is essential for the study of human knowledge in its
					multiplicity of forms. However, it is not trivial to translate this respect
					for ontological difference into sense-making and analytic tools. 
				With this respect for specificity, and its computational representation as a
					guiding concern, the Heterochronologies project puts forth a few
					fundamental notions. First, it proposes to treat graphical representations
					of time as structured data that can be made tractable, analyzed, and used
					comparatively in a digital environment; this is a humanist project that
					requires innovative digital intervention. Second, it supports the
					systematic analysis of disparate chronologies with an attention to their
					unique cultural differences. Indeed, this project was motivated by the
					conviction that different chronologies should be studied without subsuming
					them into a single standard or framework. In this regard, it is a project
					in dialogue with Linked Data initiatives that specify crosswalks into a
					uniform standard as a way to make data interoperable. The logical and
					procedural standardizations established by the Linked Data model — RDF
					standards for structures, domain ontologies for semantics, and vocabularies
					for authority control — lose sight of the specificity and cultural contexts
					of the originating data models by requiring the approximated translation of
					existing semantic structures into prescribed ones. We believe an ethical
					issue is raised by this translation and its subtle but actual assertion of
					a hegemonic approach.
				A key functionality that inspired the Heterochronologies design, and which
					allows it to enable interoperability while avoiding translation, is the
					ability to specify floating correlations, or discrete
					relationships between points in different schemes of representation that
					enable them to be compared. The idea of a floating correlation
					is that specific points in differently structured schemes can be linked
					without requiring that the systems share a structure or metric. The single
					point of correlation allows the rest of the scheme to ‘float’ with its own
					extension. For example, depictions of the Leonid Meteor Showers of 1833
					appear in multiple chronological record keeping systems, each of which is
					constructed according to its own time scale, with distinct start and end
					points, and different valuations of the event. The relative position of the
					Showers in each chronological system can be specified as a floating
					correlation, and thereby compared across systems, each as its own cultural
					expression of time. A key benefit of this approach is that it enables the
					comparison of chronologies relative to an event depicted in each, rather
					than to a unifying scheme of representation; relationality is allowed to
					emerge from the data, rather than as a consequence of the establishment of
					an a priori, unifying scheme which inevitably imposes cultural
					connotations and biases. For example, Egyptian dynastic periodization can
					be matched with geological events and Olympiads without all of these
					needing to be expressed in the Gregorian calendar, and the Winter Counts do
					not have to take the birth of Christ as the start point for their reference
					frame.
				The aforementioned notions have been operationalized through several
					activities, or goals, in the Heterochronologies project. The first is by
					studying chronological systems in their graphical expression to understand
					how they periodize, value, mark, and represent historical time; in other
					words, the first activity is to study the graphical structure of these
					chronologies as intellectual objects. The second is using this study as an
					exercise in comparative ontologies within their original formulation; the
					point of this is to make ontologies legible as ideological
					documents that can be read as value-producing systems. This
					goal is bound to a third, which is using graphical methods of analysis as
					research tools — analyzing formal, schematic, and visual representations of
					ontologies as the basis of systematic inquiry into their characteristics.
					The final goal is to provide a digital platform for organizing
					chronological information for research or pedagogical purposes. Such a
					software environment supports the analysis of chronological systems and
					their graphical forms, including how they periodize, value, mark, and
					represent historical time. This goal resulted in the development of a
					prototype for a Time Capsule work environment that includes a Collection of
					examples and a Chrono-Referencing system for organizing floating
					correlations in a digital platform. 
				Overall, the unique contribution of the Heterochronologies project has to do
					with the methodological approach through which it treats visual
					representations of time as structured data that may be serialized in a JSON
					data structure to enable cross-case comparison without requiring the
					subsumption of the various logical and semantic elements that compose such
					representations into a hegemonic system. In other words, this project
					allows correlation of data that is expressed graphically by chronologies —
					historic, contemporary, existing, and not yet created — while preserving
					the specific characteristics of their originating contexts of production.
					In this sense, though this project is focused on chronologies, the
					methodological approach and analysis are meant to be extensible to other
					kinds of ontologies. While we developed this project and the tool in which
					it culminates with the general public in mind, its scope is to support any
					and all research projects that make visual temporal representations their
					object. Academic researchers, librarians, teachers, students, and lay
					persons are all potential users of the Time Capsule tool we present in this
					paper.
			

				Approach and Requirements
				
					Epistemological Considerations
					Certain theoretical tenets inform the design of comparative tools and
						methods that this project aims to support. First, the value expressed
						by graphical representations of time — i.e., timelines and
						chronologies — is a function of the relationship between
							frames and elements within them . A frame is a defining boundary –
						graphical or conceptual – which can establish a unifying scheme of
						reference or an epistemological context that supports an arrangement
						of elements a) in relation to one another; and b) in accordance with
						certain logical rules and semantic conventions. Elements arranged in
						relation to a frame express underlying data structures and values,
						enabling them to provoke sense-making according to
						ontological and epistemological regulations that they enact. A
							further analysis of the relation between frame and elements
							informed by formal logic and analytic philosophy traditions
							reveals how the frame ultimately models the reality in which
							elements exist. Specifically, as it pertains to the environment
							it circumscribes, the frame is responsible for answering the
							question what is, in that it identifies the entities that
							exist within itself and thereby grants them ontological status.
							However, it also defines the nature of those entities by
							characterizing and modelling the semantic relations in which they
							are involved and consequently the rules that dictate their
							participation in those relations; by defining the essence and
							quality of elements, rules and relations, it establishes the
							metaphysics of the graphical representation. The conjunction of
							ontological and metaphysical definitions results in the emergence
							of the epistemological paradigm (and constraints) the
							representation expresses.
					
					For the purposes of this project, we regard frame and elements as
						formally distinct types of objects serving interdependent roles that
						can be represented computationally. Following the premise that
						graphical elements are involved in part-to-whole and part-to-part
						relations, and that their meaning is instantiated by those relations,
						any part considered for analysis should also be analyzed in relation
						to other parts and wholes that inform its significance. Furthermore,
						the formal distinction between frame and elements should be respected
						by and reflected in the digital environment to enable comparison,
						including the operations supported by the system as well as the
						underlying computational aspects at both logical and syntactical
						level. This enables the project to support comparison between diverse
						entities that exhibit the same types of relationships — i.e., element
						to element, frame to frame.
					Overall, this project acknowledges the fact that timelines and
						chronologies are artifactual representations of time charged with
						humanistic and symbolic value. Consequently, comparison between
						representations of time should not forgo the meaning or specificity of
						values proper to each. However, rhetorical aspects of chronologies, as
						well as their contextual and historical circumstances of production
						and use, are difficult to represent in data structures that could be
						analyzed and compared. Formal data structures — especially
						generalizable ones — are not particularly suited to encoding certain
						features of graphical expression. Aesthetic dimensions of color, tone,
						or line weight may be easily overlooked — not to mention such features
						as a Cherubim holding curtains aside to reveal an information-bearing
						element (Fig. 1). These features play a fundamental role in the
						interpretation of individual chronologies, evidencing their production
						and use as cultural artifacts. Acknowledging this, this project is
						committed to respecting and preserving rhetorical aspects of
						chronologies when transposing into computational representations. This
						requires not only considering them at all stages of the project
						development, but also acknowledging their significance as terms that
						enable comparison.
					As mentioned, one way this project departs from Linked Data is its
						commitment to comparison, connection, and enrichment of data through
						emergent semantic interlinking, rather than requiring entities and
						relations to conform to a uniform, prescriptive set of definitions
						established in advance of their analysis. The ways in which Linked
						Data establish relationality are problematic, in that the translation
						of local entities, whether logical or semantic, into LD seldom
						resolves in the direct correspondence of synonyms — a fact for which
						LD makes no provisions. The result is loss of information at frame and
						element levels, which inevitably contributes to the misrepresentation
						of artifacts, their features, their meaning and their overall
						specificities. This is not conducive to the instantiation of
						meaningful comparisons, since the entities being compared are not the
						original ones. Furthermore, the act of subsuming entities into a
						dominating system has hegemonic effects, in the sense that a given
						system can preclude the representation of ideas that do not fit into
						its scheme. In this sense, operating under such premises results in a
						loss of accuracy, relevance and specificity, indeed a loss of
							difference, in order to acquire of a degree of
							homogeneity that redefines the descriptions of the
						entities and is inevitably carried over to the comparison itself.
						Conversely, both quantity and quality of difference, as specificity,
						must be preserved. 

					
						Weigel - Discus Chronologicus
						
						Image of a circular disc
					

				
				
					Synchronization and Correlation
					The approach used in the Heterochronologies project preserves the
						specificity of each system — i.e., its mode of presentation, graphical
						features, and cultural contexts — while supporting correlations and
						comparisons. The project is designed so that operations carried out by
						the system enable comparison of representations without the need to
						either translate or subsume individual chronologies and comparative
						processes into a dominating epistemological paradigm.
							Constitutive difference is to be identified and
						respected without being reduced, both within individual
						representations and in the comparative act. Constitutive difference
						suggests that specificity is inherent in an artifact, but able to be
						abstracted from its particular features into a systematic means of
						comparison. Our approach to using this concept was to create a
						descriptive vocabulary from graphical images that could be used as the
						basis of a diagrammatic structure from which quantitative metrics
						could be derived. For example, a temporal unit in a biblical timeline
						would have a different graphical and thus quantitative value than in a
						geological one, but its value within the source graphic could be
						specified within the system of frames, axes, spans, intervals, and
						other components by which it was constituted. While this sounds
						abstract, it was meant to provide a way to generate quantitative value
						within each graphical example on its own terms.
					One intuitive approach to comparing graphical representations of time
						that respects constitutive difference is to align these
						representations around chronological events that they have in common.
						To reiterate, this approach invokes the concept of floating
							correlation across points of reference in distinct
						contexts, chronologies, and representations, rather than within a
						single unifying framework. By establishing common points of reference
						across contexts, distinct chronologies can be aligned and synchronized
						relative to these reference points. The already-mentioned 1833 Leonid
						meteor shower is one such common point of reference: it is an event
						that has been witnessed, recorded, and represented in different yet
						similar ways by a number of cultural groups, and for this reason it
						provides the opportunity to compare multiple representations of time
						by aligning them according to a common feature. By aligning Native
						Americans’ Winter Counts (Fig. 2, Fig. 3, Fig. 4) records of the
						Leonid meteor shower, the temporal view of events is extended in a way
						that enables comparison of structural, logical and topical elements
						across different contexts of representation and documentation. Points
						for alignment may be identified using automated processes of data
						analysis, but the Heterochronologies system is designed to support the
						manual selection of fixed events, since it is conceivable that users
						might want to specify such points in their analyses.


					
						From Lakota Winter Counts: The Teacher's
								Guide 
						
						Image of a flyer that reads "natural phenomena"
					

					
						Wood engraving by Adolf Vollmy (1889)
						
						image of a wood engraving of a meteor shower
					

					
						The Long Soldier Winter Count, note the falling stars at
							the bottom, five squares in from left.
						
						image of cave paintings
					


					Synchronization of chronologies through floating correlations between
						temporal reference points is a useful functionality, but it does not
						solve all challenges of chronological comparison. For instance, a
						linear representation that displays the succession of ancient Egyptian
						dynasties cannot be synched with Minard’s representation of Napoleon’s
						1812 march to and retreat from Moscow (Fig. 5) because of lack of
						common temporal reference points. Similarly, other temporal
						representations may, conceivably, express fundamentally different
						conceptions of time — e.g., linear versus circular/cyclical — that may
						not be able to be related through alignment of fixed events. With a
						lack of common temporal measures and structures, distinct
						representations of time are temporally incommensurable. However, other
						features may still be compared even in such cases: formal, structural,
						semantic, logical, rhetorical; types of data structures,
						distributions, intervals, quantity and quality of data points, and so
						on. Some timelines and chronologies may be aligned because they share,
						for instance, the same definition of years, months, days, or periods
						of time. Therefore, in the absence of shared temporal reference
						points, temporal markers and descriptors
						like dates can be leveraged as coordinates that enable
						synchronization.

					
						Minard - Carte figurative des pertes successives en hommes de
							l’Armée Française dans la campagne de Russie 1812–1813
						
						image of a line chart with red and black lines
					


					Still, while markers of temporal events or intervals can be used to
						identify comparable features of disparate chronologies, they do not
						ensure that these chronologies can be easily synchronized. For
						instance, the Painting and Plumbing tasks listed in the
						Ganntt chart of Fig. 6 (items 9 and 7 from the bottom, respectively)
						may be formally represented as having been completed at the same time,
						but the metric is not sufficiently granular to support correlation of
						information at a level that could guarantee precise synchronicity —
						the bars and bands are too crude. While activities that take place in
						time are represented here within time buckets or divisions, the actual
						unfolding of the activity may not happen within such discrete
						separations. In fact, time can be subdivided infinitely, and
						determining the points on which comparisons can be made within such
						divisions raises metaphysical as well as epistemological problems. At
						one extreme, the chronology titled Eternity to
							Eternity (Fig. 7) provides an edge case for thinking
						about the types of comparisons which can be enabled and supported when
						different extensions of time are put in relation. The challenge of
						periodization within such an incalculable time scale poses certain
						paradoxes — can the infinite be segmented when the start and end
						points referenced are basically indeterminate? These challenges
						quickly shift from theoretical abstractions to practical dilemmas in
						creating data representations. How can such subdivisions of “eternity”
						be translated into specified intervals in a JSON format? 
					Altogether, uncertainty remains an important factor to acknowledge when
						identifying points of alignment between chronologies. For this reason,
						the Heterochronologies system adopts a probabilistic approach to
						chronological comparison and alignment. Operations for contrasting,
						comparing, and correlating graphical representation of time should not
						be presented as fact, but with confidence intervals that indicate
						degrees of uncertainty. This approach enables the comparison of
						chronologies that employ non-discrete representations of time, with
						values that are not explicitly specified.


					
						Gantt Chart
						
						image of a Gantt chart
					

					
						Booth - A Chart On The Course Of Time From Eternity To
							Eternity
						
						image of a chart from eternity to time
					

				
				
					Project Development

					
						Defining a Problem Set

						The first phase of project development involved the analysis of a
								problem set — a group of about a dozen images,
							each exhibiting a different graphical representation of time. The
							selection of the problem set was informed by the need to a)
							create a representative selection of approaches in terms of
							scale, graphical structure, cultural points of view, and other
							features, and to b) collect edge cases that would challenge,
							complicate, or otherwise highlight key conceptual or formal
							aspects of chronologies. The problem set was not meant to be
							exhaustive in any way, but rather to raise problems for existing
							approaches that concern the Heterochronologies project, and in
							this sense to provide fundamental constraints that must be
							considered for comparing diverse representations of time. These
							are from Western, Russian, Chinese, Native American cultures, and
							date from the early Renaissance (with roots in antiquity) through
							to the early 20th century. Throughout research, we referred to
							the images in this problem set to iteratively develop conventions
							for describing the logical, graphical, and semantic structures
							entailed by representations of time. The problem set includes
							both chronologies — date stamped, discrete,
							event-specific representations of historical events — and
								timelines — continuous temporal phenomena in a
							unified linear format. Although the images in the problem set
							share certain features of continuous and linear representations
							of time, we selected examples that posed challenges for
							comparison; thus, while some of the images are more strictly
							concerned with temporal relations, others emphasize relationships
							among historical events.
						As we started thinking about the premises under which comparison of
							graphical representations of time could be carried out and the
							computational processes and environments that might host it, we
							concentrated on defining the types of information presented by
							such artifacts as well as the ways in which that information is
							represented. Specifically, we focused on identifying and defining
							a) how meaning is instantiated by timelines and chronologies; and
							b) the visual/logical conventions and structures within them that
							represent and expose difference. The problem set was designed to
							provide a wide range of data structures with a variety of
							metrics. 
						Some key issues emerged from our iterative analysis of these
							examples (the complete details of which are included in the
							Appendix). These included formal problems involved in qualifying
							representations with respect to a comparative model, and
							representational problems involved in transposing graphical
							elements into a computational syntax that would make them
							tractable for analysis. These issues were: the role of grids in
							the establishment and identification of synchronicity; the
							presence of coexisting timelines within single artifacts;
							overlapping axes and their challenging of the definition of
							frame; implicit axes; heterogeneity of axes’ scale (granularity);
							importance of rhetorical, sometimes decorative, elements to the
							establishment of value/meaning; ‘orientation’ and direction of
							reading and interpretation; the importance of fixed points in the
							synchronization of chronologies; ‘soft’ relations and non-Boolean
							data; heterogeneity of data types (Boolean/non-Boolean)
							converging in one chart; need for representing uncertainty. 
					
					

						Graphical Approach/Strategies

						After selecting the problem set, we identified graphical,
							structural, and semantic elements in the chronologies and
							formulated a descriptive vocabulary — or notation system — of
							components that were represented across instances in the problem
							set. Here, graphical methods of analysis were used as a primary
							mode of knowledge production, which further developed our
							understanding of project needs and challenges . This taxonomy demonstrated the
							possibility of consistently defining and hence comparing elements
							in the chronologies, but it did not adequately account for
							structural relationships among these elements, nor aesthetic
							variations. The fundamental taxonomy (described in detail in the
							next section) included the terms frame (outer border
							in logical, metrical, and graphical senses); axes
							(orientation for time sequences and periodization);
								span (range and intervals of chronology);
								segments (subdivisions of span that helped
							identify range and scale); symbols (graphical
							features, legends, other elements that were glosses on the
							timeline/chronologies or additions to it); and significant
								points (known events useful for alignment).
						In order to formulate conventions for describing these structural
							and aesthetic features, we developed a second approach which
							included the formulation of a markup language or computational
							syntax that could schematically represent the visual elements in
							the chronologies. Because a programming language is designed to
							support the specification of a wider variety of functionalities
							than the language itself, we could design such a language to
							specify differences across chronologies that would still adhere
							to a common scheme of specification. Through following principles
							of computer programming, such as the insistence on the reuse of
							code, the elimination of syntactical redundancies, and the
							modularization of components, we could design such a language to
							operate as an efficient means of summarizing and comparing
							elements across the chronologies.
					
					

						Platform development

						The third phase was the design of a conceptual and computational
							framework that could support the analysis of chronological
							representations for research and pedagogy. A key principle
							guiding this design is that components of a chronology are often
							incommensurable across chronologies, but they can be correlated —
							either as specific dates or in reference to common temporal
							events. The challenge here is to perform analysis on linguistic,
							graphic, or pictorial contents, while still accounting for the
							structural and syntactic idiosyncrasies of graphical
							representations. To showcase this approach, we designed mock-ups
							of a Time Capsule software environment that illustrate how a user
							might interact with chronologies of interest.
						A main feature of the Time Capsule framework is a
							chrono-referencing scheme that enables floating correlation and
							temporal synchronization between chronologies. Chrono-References
							are chronological systems in common use that we selected to serve
							as substitutable schemes of reference for chronological analysis.
							These include Gregorian, Julian, Christian, Islamic, Jewish,
							Egyptian (dynasties), Winter counts, Mayan, and Chinese calendar
							systems. A second set might include geological time periods
							(Archean, Cambrian, Ordovician etc.),
							anthropological/archaeological ones (Bronze Age, Iron Age and so
							on linked to specific geographical locations), and other domain
							specific, discipline or task-driven schemes, such as carbon
							dating. To demonstrate how chrono-referencing might operate, we
							present the Time Capsule mock-up with a sample of chronologies
							called a Collection, annotated with Chrono-References. The
							purpose of the Collection is to demonstrate how a computational
							framework for comparing chronologies could operate in practice
							and extend to other objects of study. We examined Period.o
								and OWLTime as possibilities, but the first has a strong
								geo-location structure and the second is premised on an a
								priori positivist dating system. Neither of these worked for
								our premise of chronologies as descriptive structures
								instantiated in graphical form. 
						
						To aid this approach, we drew on the substantial precedents for
							programming languages that are used to specify visual elements,
							such as the D3 and three.js JavaScript libraries. These
							code libraries involve a) a syntax for drawing graphical
							elements; b) certain pre-made functions that produce more complex
							visual elements, and c) in the case of D3, a data visualization system that enables
								binding data to graphical elements, and then
							adjusting them dynamically. Libraries like D3 can be used to produce a wide variety of
							visualizations using the same components and similar techniques,
							although with some unifying constraints. To develop a
							computational visualization with this code library, a programmer
							envisions certain graphics and functionalities, and then works
							backward to identify functionalities provided by the library that
							could produce this result. We envision this method of ‘working
							backwards’ as an approach to devise a markup language that would
							allow for comparison between existing visualizations. In short,
							if we can design a new language to produce a variety of different
							visualizations, this language can also be used to compare
							them.
						Within this framework, we worked on finding ways to construct
							existing visualizations out of computational elements. The method
							of devising a programming syntax raised fundamental design
							considerations concerning how to specify and relate graphical and
							structural elements. For example, the axis object in the Gantt
							chart (Fig. 6) could be treated as a ‘global’ object with
							attributes that other elements in the chart could ‘inherit;’
								or it could be defined as a ‘local’ object with
							its own unique attributes. Through identifying and discussing
							design considerations such as this, we assessed the trade-offs
							and implications for comparing chronologies through these
							methods. Here, a central concern was to ensure that the
							constraints and patterns of a programming syntax did not
							over-determine our scheme of description and comparison. In the
							case of the axis, for example, the axes were not defined as
							‘global’ objects, which would be a convenience for programming,
							because that would impose a computational design pattern onto the
							visualization that it does not specify. In all instances, the
							Heterochronologies environment worked to avoid subsuming
							specificity and difference into either generality or
							uniformity.
						In the initial version of our programming syntax, classes and
							attributes were specified for elements which would define their
							more specific properties. Axis classes, for example,
							included horizontal, continuous, named, ranged,
								segmented, and crossed elements, each of
							which would define the appearance of the axis and the possible
							attributes it could have. One of these class attributes —
								crossed — joined elements together so that they
							could represent multiple attributes of data (also called
							‘dimensions’), which would then enable plotting data according to
							these elements. For the Gantt chart, the axis and table were
							‘crossed’ so that data with an axis attribute and a table
							attribute could be populated among them. Other attributes like
							segments could take another element as a property, allowing for a
							kind of nesting or inheritance structure.
						Altogether, this exercise in creating a programming syntax could be
							described as ‘projecting’ a programming environment onto a
							graphical representation. However, the benefit of this approach
							lies not so much in its product as its process — recognizing that
							much of the programming was extracted from the graphical
							features, not merely projected onto them. Through the devised
							syntax, graphical and structural elements that could be
							represented with the same vocabulary were identified and
							transposed to the new analytical system without losing sight of
							their specificity. This raised some challenges. As the markup
							language developed, it became clear that it would be easier to
							view the specified graphical and structural elements relationally
							in visual form, instead of as displays of code. This was the
							motivation for the third approach in the methodology: to draw
							relational diagrams of the chronologies and their components. At
							this time, another provisional taxonomy of components was defined
							that persisted throughout our experiments and discussions.
						The design of the relational diagrams was informed in part by
							visual programming environments where elements can be combined to
							make other elements. Experiments with the ways in which basic
							elements could be combined to make new elements draw out these
							combination sequences. As the diagrams developed iteratively, the
							taxonomy of components that could represent the patterns was
							updated. In an approach similar to the development of the
							programming syntax, the iterative design of the relational
							diagrams raised considerations and challenges for creating a
							scheme of chronology comparison and consequently prompted further
							discussion. At this point, a crucial distinction was made between
								spans, or graphical extensions that imply
							directionality or continuity, and sets, which are
							graphical groupings of other elements that do not imply
							directionality and continuity. Conventions developed for
							specifying non-directional relationships between these elements
							which were still able to account for structural hierarchies that
							they implied.
						This series of iterations on the designs of relational diagrams
							allowed simplification of their organization and identification
							of broader structural similarities among them. [See Figures 9,
							10, and 11 below.] A graphical system was iteratively designed to
							enable these structures to be compared in a simplified and
							intuitive way. In the final graphical system, textual
							descriptions of elements (e.g., axis, span) are summarized with
							symbolic glyphs. Instead of representing relationships between
							structural elements with lines, which tended to imply
							directionality, overlapping regions are used to indicate
							constraints that certain elements impose on others, and graphical
							conventions indicate high-level properties of these constraints,
							like their segmentations.
						Overall, the process of developing a graphical system enabled a
								grapho-logical analysis of chronologies: the
							use of a notation system to summarize structural features of
							chronological representations for visual comparison. The concept
							of grapho-logical analysis is that of extracting quantitative
							metrics from the specific structures of chronological
							representations, which enables these structure to be analyzed and
							visualized. In other words, it is a method of abstracting
							structured data from schematic images, which can then be examined
							for further analysis. By identifying relationships between frame,
							span, interval, tick-marks or units and other graphic features,
							and then specifying them in a notation system, the value of any
							particular element can be analyzed and visualized relative to the
							whole.
						Grapho-logical analysis supports the comparison of chronological
							representations that involve different specifications or indices
							of time, but comparable structures for representing time
							nonetheless. In a biblical time frame, for instance, Creation is
							dated to 4004 BCE. This allows for an explicit calculation of the
							year of Christ’s birth and the present, from Adam to Noah and by
							extension, spans of time in the present. By contrast, the use of
							historical timeline for events from the colonization of America
							to the first presidents of the United States is designed on grid
							that spans only about two hundred years from 1607 to 1800. The
							units in the second chronology are decades, but they imply a
							relation to the Gregorian calendar and the birth of Christ as the
							0 year. The two timelines can be compared graphically, with the
							relative value metrically computed. A presidential term of four
							years has a value when it is located in a span of two hundred
							years. The same two hundred years of history has a different
							relative value within a six thousand year span (or within the
							endless expanse of eternity).
						The different scales can also be demonstrated through a graphic
							comparison. This supports correlation — using the zero year or
							using the time span of the historical chart next the metric of in
								Eternity to Eternity (Figure
							8). The method allows us to see (literally, in visual form) the
							relationship of one schema to another while also understanding
							the relative quantitative value of events within each.
							Presidential terms might diminish in significance relative to the
							span of eternal timescale, or, by contrast, demonstrate the value
							of the specific granularity of measures. What is the value of a
							year? It can be calculated relative to the span to which the year
							belongs. Generating such metric values supports comparison and
							correlation — the representation of constitutive difference
							 — without forcing either scheme to be represented in
							terms of the other. The approach gets at the specifics of value
							in each scheme (four years of two hundred, two hundred years of
							six thousand). In this way, grapho-logical analysis offers a
							schematic presentation of the information and visualizes the
							relative scales in an immediately graspable format that is also
							quantitative and computable.


						
							While eternity has no end-point, specific intervals (green
								arrow) and points (red) (Adam to Noah or Year 0) have
								explicit metrics. These allow for correlation with other
								chronologies, such as the Historical and Biographical Chart
								of the United States which correspond to the blue arrow
								above (starting at approximately 1600, using the same metric
								scale as the green arrow).
							
							
							the same chart as above but with a red line in the
								middle
						

					
				

				
					Implementation and Contributions
					The Heterochronologies project aims to make several contributions to
						humanistic study of graphical expressions of time-keeping: a) a
						descriptive vocabulary that supports the specification of structural
						features in chronological representations; b) a grapho-logical system
						for analyzing these features; c) a computational framework for
						correlating and comparing these features, in the form of a digital
						workspace for research and pedagogy built on this computational
						framework. The project is focused on the analysis of the specific
						features of these chronologies in structural and semantic terms, and
						gave rise to the concept of a computational framework that supports
						the interactive analysis of chronologies, exemplified by the Time
						Capsule — a speculative digital workspace where the analytic,
						descriptive, and comparative methods are combined in a platform for
						research and pedagogy. 
				

				

					Descriptive Vocabulary

					As mentioned above, the project began with creation of a descriptive and
						analytic vocabulary of the structural and semantic components of
						graphical chronologies. The vocabulary is meant to be general enough
						to apply to most individual images but specific enough to provide
						analysis of features in each visual representation. 
					The structural components identified were: 
					
						frame (outer border as a logical, metrical defining boundary); 
						span (with extension, range, and marked intervals); 
						axis (main line of temporal development or sequence with a
							directional orientation); 
						segments (each a span with its own range and scale); 
						symbols (signs and elements used in a legend as a graphical
							notation system for 
						information);
						significant/fixed points (known events that can be used for
							alignment across chronologies);
						set (graphical grouping);
						quantitative value (scale or metrics);
						implied components (for example, longitude when only latitude is
							explicitly represented).
					
					The semantic components are the units of time: 
					
						
							lifetimes; 
						historical events; 
						
							periods defined by features like reigns of monarchs
							or establishment of nations or empires; 
						
							cycles of seasons or calendrical systems; and 
						others within an emerging typology derived from the
								chronologies. Credit for making a typology of units of
								time belongs to Helge Jordheim, in conversation about the
								project. 
						
					
					A typology of graphical structures is also useful for standardizing
						description of the chronologies and relating them to data structures: 
					
						tree (branching and hierarchical); 
						river (flow, unclear segmentation, and vague or approximate
							metrics); 
						grid (clear crossing points, or column/row values, and explicit
							metrics); 
						score (synchronicity and a topological structure); 
						bars (chronologies and spans, more or less explicit metrics); 
						segmented wheels and disk; 
						other formats derived from examples. 
					
					This descriptive vocabulary provides the basis for terms of comparison
						between representations of chronologies: from point to point; among
						data values; to allow visualizations to be embedded into or overlaid
						on each other; and to support a relational model of contrast and
						correlation. One principle of contrast guiding the project is that
						data points have value in relation to a calculable ratio of
						granularity and density. In addition, these points generally carry an
						attribute specifying degrees of uncertainty. Some degrees of
						uncertainty are merely a factor of granularity: the Battle of Hastings
						takes place in 1066, but the actual span of this event in terms of
						preparation, action, intervals, continuity, aftermath and other
						factors make mapping it into a specific calendrical system difficult
						if not impossible. Uncertainty can arise from any number of factors:
						lack of precision in the information, or in the phenomenon
						represented, or in the representation. 
				
				

					Grapho-logical analysis

					In parallel with developing a descriptive and analytic vocabulary, the
						project made use of various graphical methods for analyzing the
						structures and representation of chronologies. An initial question was
						whether formal data could be extracted automatically from the visual
						representations, by using optical character recognition (OCR) or other
						approaches to automated graphical analysis, or whether formal data
						could be specified by a custom notation system. Specifying the
						requirements of such formal approaches to data extraction and
						representation of structure led to the development of a grapho-logical
						notation system designed to facilitate and represent comparison and
						correlation of structural components. Grapho-logical analysis supports
						a connection between graphical images (timelines and chronologies) and
						logical structures that can be represented in computational terms,
						enabling their subsequent visualization and analysis. This addressed
						the challenge of identifying the ways in which the formal structures
						of chronologies could be represented as logical structures that are
						legible to computational processing. By determining the components of
						the logical structure, the typology of relationships among the
						components, and ways for these components of the formal structure to
						become a data structure, this method addressed ways in which a data
						structure could be abstracted and/or extracted directly from an
						image.
					The grapho-logical approach to comparison also provides a formal
						notational scheme as a shorthand for display of that analysis within
						the Time Capsule workspace (see figures below). Grapho-logical
						analysis is based on the components and factors of comparison outlined
						above (axes, orientation, spans, events, and segments). For instance,
						start-points and end-points of an axis provide a crucial feature on
						which to make correlations. (The space of time from Creation to the
						Flood, for instance, is different from that defined by fixed dates
						such as 1700-1890 or that indicated by a span from Eternity to
						Eternity.) One crucial tenet of belief guiding the project has been
						that graphical methods of analysis are primary modes of knowledge
						production, and demonstrating this is important. The graphical
						elements of the original documents are considered essential
						information, even when they are abstracted into a second-order
						grapho-logical system. This notation scheme is analytic (it shows how
						the relation of structural features in the chronologies can be
						understood in a distilled, diagrammatic, mode) and representational
						(it encodes that analysis in a visual shorthand). It is designed to
						represent constitutive difference across representations,
						rather than to indicate the structure of these representations
						definitively.
				

				

					The Time Capsule

					Through acknowledging the potential of (1) floating correlations to make
						disparate chronological schemes of reference comparable, (2) a
						descriptive vocabulary to identify structural and semantic features of
						chronologies, and (3) grapho-logical methods of analysis to summarize,
						clarify, and compare these features, the idea of a computational
						framework was devised that could assist researchers in identifying,
						annotating, and analyzing these features. Such a framework would allow
						for the specification of points within a chronological system to be
						isolated for correlation with other chronologies, as well as the
						visualization of these correlations and their characteristics. As
						noted earlier, the Leonid meteor showers demonstrate how the
						significance of an event is valued differently within a Winter Count
						that focused on one event per yearly cycle by contrast with its place
						in an astronomical calendar in which this was one among many celestial
						events, though it also repeated about every thirty-three years. A
						computational framework could support the specification of the
						structural organization and value-producing apparatus of these
						chronological representations — one at a time, or comparatively.
					To demonstrate how this computational system might operate in practice,
						we designed mock-ups of a Time Capsule software environment, which
						demonstrates practical applications of the various contributions just
						outlined. It is imagined as a digital sandbox that supports various
						activities: grapho-logical analysis (or modeling of logical
						relationships expressed by graphics), semantic topic modeling of
						linguistic data extracted automatically (or manually) from the
						chronologies, a formal analysis of values generated within the
						ontological structure of the chronologies, and, a workspace for
						research and pedagogy. In the Time Capsule, existing chronologies are
						displayed and their structural as well as semantic features analyzed
						in a combination of automated and hand-annotated practice. 
					The Time Capsule is not a working software prototype, but a sketch for
						how considerations developed through the Heterochronologies project
						can be implemented in a computational architecture. Developing the
						Time Capsule enabled us to identify a set of minimum functionalities
						and techniques that would support this task:
					
						The user can import chronological representations as images and
							view them in a Collection with associated metadata and
							information (Figure 11). To support this, each imported
							chronological representation can be paired with information
							stored in a JSON format and indexed by a database, called its
								chronological metadata. The Time Capsule could
							be displayed in an interactive web-based interface that retrieves
							information from the chronological metadata stored
							either on the user’s machine, or in a remote repository, and uses
							HTML, CSS, canvas, and JavaScript to render interactive
							representations of the chronological metadata to the
							screen.
						The user can select one or multiple chronological
							representations for annotation and analysis (Figure 9).
						The user can manually annotate regions of the chronological
							representations in order to interactively specify their
							structural and semantic features, which will update its
								chronological metadata (Figure 9A). The X and Y
							position of each user annotation, along with the type of
							structural feature that it represents (i.e., defined by the
							descriptive vocabulary) is stored in the chronological
								metadata.
						Optionally, the user can use optical character recognition (OCR)
							to automatically annotate regions of the chronological
							representation that might be of interest for further analysis.
							Once recognized, text associated with automatically annotated
							regions is stored in the chronological metadata.
						
						A summary of the chronological metadata is
							displayed both graphically (Figure 9B) and in the format of a
							markup language that the user can edit in a dynamic text field
							(Figure 9C).
						The user can manually specify the structural features of
							chronological representations using a markup language, which
							summarizes the chronological metadata and makes it
							editable in a dynamic text field (Figure 9C). The markup in the
							dynamic text field is color-coded to correspond to particular
							structural features that have been identified, which are also
							visible as graphical annotations (Figure 9A) and a visual summary
							(Figure 9B).
						When the user modifies the markup in the dynamic text field,
							they are subsequently prompted to annotate the chronological
							representation to specify the graphical features that the markup
							corresponds to. The user can click elements of the markup in the
							dynamic text field to change their corresponding references. Each
							of these changes is stored in the chronological
								metadata.
						The user can toggle the visibility of windows and features in
							the software environment to suit the task at hand (Figure 9D).
							The modularity of windows supports the extension of
							functionalities in the software environment with plug-ins.
						The user can specify temporal and chronological attributes of
							the structural features that they have already specified (Figure
							10). Color-coding reflects relationships between temporalities
							and chronologies across their representations.
						The user can select which structural features have chronological
							properties (Figure 10B) for visualization as timelines (Figure
							10C).
						The user can annotate visualized timelines with text (Figure
							10C). Annotations are stored in the chronological
								metadata.
						Optionally, the user can use optical character recognition (OCR)
							and subsequent topic modeling to identify the prevalence of
							certain terms across chronological representations, and view the
							relationships of these terms to each chronology (left-hand side
							of Figure 10C). 
						User annotations that have automatically been stored in the
								chronological metadata are summarized in the
							Collection browser (Figure 11).
					
					In addition to access to the Collection of graphical examples (the
						original problem set and any additional images), the Time Capsule
						would be pre-loaded with a set of default Chrono-Referencing
						schemes. The Chrono-References are formal data schemes drawn from an
						inventory of solar calendars, lunar-solar, lunar, seasonal, and other
						systems (e.g., dynastic histories, geological and archaeological time
						scales). The workspace exemplified by the Time Capsule is designed to
						allow for pedagogical engagement, to ask and answer such questions as:
						what can be learned from comparing seasonal cycles to cosmological
						ones? Lunar calendars to solar? Or biblical chronological schemes to
						archaeological ones? And so on. Individual timelines and chronologies
						— of historical events or personal histories — would be able to be
						mapped into the frameworks through the annotation tools, thus
						providing a work environment for individual and collaborative work.
						For research purposes, the platform would allow data to be uploaded
						from time-keeping or time-stamped activities and displayed in relation
						to any of the graphical instances or on a blank template with
						Chrono-Referencing schemes called into play. The format of this
							Time Capsule space is inspired by the Map Room project of Yanni
							Loukissas and others, which encourages participatory engagement
							with cartographic base maps in the same way that the
							Heterochronologies supports play with the chronological
							schemes. (Figures 9, 10, 11).

					
						Using the Time Capsule to specify the grapho-logical components
							of two chronologies: "Ten Fathers before the Flood" and "Der
							Storm Der Zeiten." The user has specified and named five
							components that appear in the chronologies: years,
								fathers, time,
								nations, and leaders, and they
							have defined their specific properties. The Time Capsule displays
							(A) the location of these components in the graphics, (B) a
							visual summary of the components, their properties, and their
							structural relationships, and (C) a dynamic text field for
							editing the properties and structural relationships of the
							components. The visibility of these displays can be toggled in
							the sidebar (D).
						
						screenshots of the project website and code
					

					
						Using the Time Capsule to compare chronologies, after having
							specified grapho-logical components in Figure 9. In the visual
							summary of components (B), the user has selected the components
								years, fathers, and time, which
							causes them to appear in the Comparison window alongside
							user-created annotations (C). The Comparison window visualizes
							and aligns the two components according to properties and
							Chrono-References that the user has specified. This automatic
							alignment colors the components with a rainbow gradient to
							indicate the relative progression of time. On the lefthand side
							of (C), the Comparison window displays a number of topics that a
							topic modeling algorithm has associated with the two components.
							The visibility of these displays can be toggled in the sidebar
							(D).
						
						screenshot of the project website with a timeline at the
							bottom
					

					
						Browsing the Collection of the Time Capsule, which lists
							chronologies in a scrollable table. Text fields at the top of
							each column (A) enable the user to search and filter the
							chronologies. The rows of the table display (B) timelines from
							each chronology annotated with Chrono-References, (C) components
							specified the user, and (D) topics associated to each chronology
							by the topic modeling algorithm.
						
						screenshot of the time capsule
					
				
			

				Observations and future developments
				The practical application of ideas to the Time Capsule is meant to connect
					the analytical engagement with research and pedagogical activity. The
					design of the Time Capsule includes recognition of a basic epistemological
					concern with constitutive difference. Such difference stems from the
					structural, logical, semantic, and rhetorical features of these
					representation (intrinsic difference). In order to conduct a meaningful
					comparison, differences among representations may be identified (extrinsic
					difference). Intrinsically non-Boolean relations represented in some
					chronologies (those that cannot be adequately expressed in explicit, formal
					terms) also need to be respected within the formalization process.
					Regardless of whether the compared chronologies include non-Boolean terms
					or not, comparisons are hosted in a probabilistic environment and
					represented accordingly, as floating correlations.
				Other issues remain, of course, and a working prototype would expose any
					number of problems with the conceptual prototype. Some are theoretical, or
					epistemological, such as the method for representing infinity in a data
					structure, or for representing simultaneity or synchronicity. These are
					philosophical issues as much as technical ones. A practical matter is how
					to segment the chronologies, and what the justification for segmentation
					might be in any instance. The semantics of segmentation invoke the
					description of units of time, mentioned above (days, lifetimes, solar
					cycles, and other temporal units) with their symbolic as well as metrical
					value. Unresolved issues worth mentioning here are related to the
					challenges posed by the visual motifs of graphical representations which
					play an important rhetorical role but are not part of the formal temporal
					notation system; these qualities of inflection and style in lettering,
					drawing, line treatment, iconography, mythical figures, and allegorical
					images which, while incidental to the logical structure, are crucial to the
					semantic value, could not be readily absorbed into a logical structure.
				Indeed, a thorough analysis of chronologies ought to consider structural,
					logical, semantic, and graphical elements. The structural elements include
					the value of formal position, graphical zones that map onto visual zones
					for machine learning, framing or boundary delimitation, components seen
					relationally down to the item level, and various syntaxes of part to whole
					of specific features. Initially, these were subjected to an automated image
					analysis process, akin to OCR, that pointed at graphical entities. This
					identified various semantic features, including components that lend
					themselves to topic modeling, statistical analysis, and to humanistic
					interpretative study within the ideological, material, and cultural
					contexts of which they are an expression and in which they are embedded.
					The graphical qualities thus gave rise to a combined typology of schematic
					forms, understood diagrammatically as images that perform work, obtain
					value through their structure (e.g., the rooted tree and the un-rooted
					tree; the matrix/grid and the cycle), and are available to a combination of
					automated and human analysis. The extent to which the analysis of graphical
					form can be fully automated remains to be seen, as naturally many features
					that give the chronologies their visual and cultural specificity will not
					lend themselves to computational analysis without reduction to a point that
					renders the information descriptively inadequate.
			

				Conclusion
				The goals of the Heterochronologies system have been to analyze visual
					representations of time — chronologies and timelines — as meaningful
					cultural and historical objects in a way that preserves their specificity.
					Chronologies perform semantic and syntactic work of embodying historically
					and culturally specific understandings of the boundaries and values of
					temporal events. To analyze chronology with this in mind, a method of
					graphical analysis of frames, axes, components, and features was developed
					along with an elaboration of a semantics of time units (days, lifetimes,
					periods etc.). The use of graphical methods of schematic logical analysis
					was part of this work, demonstrating the value of visual approaches as an
					intellectual component of research and study. The need for a computational
					framework to support interactive analysis of chronologies arose from the
					use of these graphical methods to establish parameters on which value at
					any particular point could be assessed through correlation, rather than
					through a crosswalk into a reductively uniform system. Finally, the project
					worked to develop a design prototype for a Time Capsule work environment
					that allows graphical correlation, annotation, and visual comparison for
					pedagogical and research purposes. 
				While implementation and working proof of concept remain to be realized, the
					conceptual development of the Heterochronologies project is an experiment
					in approaching problems of knowledge representation through graphical
					objects and visual methods. This is an opening to innovative work in
					digital scholarship. Chronologies are graphical, pictorial representations
					of data over time. They express semantic value within a defined frame, both
					through the use of structural and logical data representation techniques,
					as well as iconography. Contrastingly, the re-mediation of those artifacts
					under the graphical scheme we created extracts value from the pictorial and
					transposes it to a higher, conceptual, diagrammatic level. By abstractly
					describing the structures that compose and instantiate the artifacts, the
					diagrammatic display enables the relations that define the semantic values
					to come to the fore, and the entities involved in those relations to be
					thusly described relationally.
				While such a system of representation is built upon an identification and
					formal description of the artifacts through a vocabulary of components, it
					is not hegemonic in that it intentionally concentrates on constitutive
					difference rather than translation. The project systematically and
					deliberately avoided establishing a single overarching temporal frame to
					which all other chronologies would be referenced. The inventory of
					Chrono-Referencing schemes supports correlation and comparison, so that
					chronologies do not have to be subsumed into a unified or single standard.
					While this project remains in prototype and proof of concept phase,
					considerable analytic work and design has been accomplished with regard to
					fundamental principles of graphical methods of analysis, chronologies as a
					specific case for comparative ontologies, and the idea of a computational
					framework that supports interactions in a software environment for research
					and pedagogy. This work is exemplified by the Time Capsule, which
					demonstrates the design of an extensible Library and set of
					Chrono-Referencing tools. The concepts being proved here are currently
					being developed as working prototypes.

			

				Appendix
				
					A Sampling of Chrono-Referencing Schemes
					
						Solar calendars
						Lunisolar calendars
						Lunar calendars
						Seasonal calendars
						Other
					

					
						Gregorian calendar Islamic (solar Hijri) calendar 
							Runic calendar Julian calendar Tamil calendar

						 Buddhist calendar (set) Hebrew Calendar Hindu
							Calendar (set)


						Babylonian calendar Islamic (lunar Hijri) calendar

						Nisga’a calendar  Inuit calendar Indigenous Australian
							calendar  Indigenous Australian Weather calendar 

						Geologic time scale  Egyptian dynasties Egyptian
							Periods Egyptian lunar calendar  Chinese Dynasties;
							 Maya calendar: Haab’, Tzolk’in, Trecena Aztec
							calendar: Xiuhpohualli, Tonalpohualli
					
				
			
