Title:  How to Read Minds: A Review of 
Volume:  011
Issue:  2
Date:  13 February 2018
Abstract:  
                
                In Refiguring Minds in Narrative Media (2015), David
                    Ciccoricco employs an impressive range of contemporary science on cognition,
                    memory, and emotion to update our narratological theory so that we might be
                    better equipped to read minds in printed fiction, digital fiction, and video
                    games. In doing so, Ciccoricco expands the remit of the burgeoning field of
                    cognitive literary studies, which despite its recent growth remains largely
                    focused on print fiction published before the 20th century. Refiguring Minds is an exemplary work of cognitive literary studies
                    which showcases both the field’s weaknesses and its strengths. While Ciccoricco
                    sometimes tends towards reductionism — a problem in any scientifically-inflected
                    field of literary study — he also enriches our understanding of the cognitive
                    processes in fictional characters and in ourselves as we engage with those
                    fictional minds.
            
Full Body Text: 
Cognitive literary studies has become increasingly established as a discipline, its
                rise marked by landmark studies such as Lisa Zunshine’s Why We
                    Read Fiction: Theory of Mind and the Novel (2006) and Alan Richardson’s
                    British Romanticism and the Science of Mind (2001).
                Yet its focus is still largely on print fiction published before the twentieth
                century. In Refiguring Minds in Narrative Media, David
                Ciccoricco addresses this imbalance, expanding the field to cover not only some
                twentieth-century print fiction but digital fiction and video games as well. Though
                Ciccoricco recognises that 
                    what we call cognitive literary
                            studies can by all means operate as one literary-critical
                        approach among many
                    
                , he also begins by making the fair case that literary studies in general
                should move on from its outdated reliance on the psychoanalytic idiom which has
                dominated it in the twentieth century. His study addresses cognitive literary
                studies specifically, but one of Ciccoricco’s aims is to contribute to the larger
                ongoing re-evaluation of the mistaken mechanisms and flawed foundations of
                the Freudian model of the unconscious, memory, and repression . Almost twenty years after the first excited
                manifestos for cognitive literary studies, Ciccoricco’s book soberly demonstrates
                that literary studies need not necessarily aim to run alongside the
                    cutting-edge of cognitive science, but it has to at least
                be responsibly current
                . 
The book as a whole serves as a strong example of how literary studies might
                productively draw on the contemporary sciences of mind. Ciccoricco is extremely
                diligent throughout, and his assimilation and explication of a wide range of
                cognitive reading alone will make his study hugely beneficial to others working in
                the burgeoning field. His cognitive research is matched by an equally impressive
                engagement with both long-established and very new narratological and literary
                theory. One of the central theoretical problems with which Ciccoricco opens his
                study concerns the relationship between representation and simulation. As Ciccoricco
                explains, 
                    digital media push the project of cognitive literary and
                        narrative theory into new (kinetic, cybernetic, ludic) territory
                    
                . Once we begin to read minds in other media, we have to ask new questions
                about how those minds are both represented to, and enacted within, the
                reader/player. This complex theoretical area is the thread with which Ciccoricco
                subtly ties the whole study together. 
The book is divided into two parts, Attention and
                    Perception and Memory and Emotion. Each
                part contains three chapters, the first of which explains an exemplary work of
                printed literature, the second a digital fiction, and the third a video game. In the
                first chapter Ciccoricco rereads Patrick White’s The Solid
                    Mandala (1966), a novel about the relationship between twins. While
                acknowledging that White’s novel was informed by Jungian psychology, and that Jung
                is therefore a necessary figure for understanding the novel (which has been the
                approach taken in much of its criticism), Ciccoricco demonstrates the potential of
                updating prevailing literary-critical treatments of the (Freudian and Jungian)
                    unconscious with the more contemporary model of the adaptive
                    unconscious popularised in particular by Timothy D. Wilson . In this chapter, which is grounded in
                careful use of interdisciplinary terms such as social psychology’s
                    attribution (denoting the 
                    psychological act of assigning mental
                        states
                    
                ), Ciccoricco develops a persuasive reading of the novel that accounts for the
                way that one of the twins, Arthur — like the reader — is persuaded by his brother’s
                misattributions of Arthur’s own mental life. 
The second chapter is devoted to Young-Hae Chang Heavy Industries (YHCHI)’s The Last Day of Betty Nkomo (2005), which, like most
                digital fictions, implicitly challenges our 
                    traditional reading practices
                    
                 and our ways of talking about reading. Building on recent criticism around
                reading practices, such as N. Katherine Hayles’s distinction between deep and hyper
                attention, Ciccoricco challenges the popular view that a digital fiction such as
                    Betty Nkomo — which flashes 150-odd screens in
                the space of 
                    one minute and twelve seconds
                    
                 describing the death of an ill or elderly, impoverished woman — spells
                the death of modern attention spans. Betty takes Ciccoricco into a detailed
                discussion of the cybernetic narrator and cybernetic
                    narration – terms which, like those in the first chapter, work to
                take account of the minds involved in the reading process: how is the fiction
                produced or altered, and how therefore is the reader’s experience changed, in the
                interaction between human and machine? Though YHCHI’s text works like speed-reading
                software to leave no time for conscious readerly reflection, Ciccoricco persuasively
                argues that Betty Nkomo is a kind of cybernetic loop, a
                marriage of content and form: it self-consciously points to its demands on our
                attention because the fact we are require[d] to pay extra attention is itself
                part of the text’s meaning .
The third chapter’s explication of the video game Journey (2012) brings the player, rather than the reader,
                into cognitive literary studies. Though this chapter moves deftly between Gestalt
                psychology, mythology, and the concept of narrative universals, the stakes of the
                chapter are less clear and some of the limitations of the cognitive literary project
                became particularly apparent here. At its weakest, this chapter tends to read far
                more like the largely discredited sibling of cognitive literary studies: literary
                Darwinism. Jonathan Kramnick remarked of literary Darwinism that it ultimately has
                nothing to say about literary texts, 
                    apart from what it would extract elsewhere from the
                        evolutionary psychological edifice (claims about mate selection or
                        aggression, for example)
                    
                . Unlike the previous chapters, where Ciccoricco’s use of the cognitive
                sciences to illuminate the minds of readers and characters felt appropriate and
                persuasive, here the gestures to a larger evolutionary narrative are less so. When
                discussing how Journey’s players control a wordless
                avatar who comes across other wordless avatars (controlled by other players), and
                the ways in which they have to try and communicate, Ciccoricco offers a scientific
                explanation of this phenomena: 
                    The theory of inclusive fitness establishes the benefits of
                        social altruism among group members based on the greater likelihood of it
                        leading to the perpetuation of genes among one’s in-group […] we have the
                        obvious instinctual mandate to tend and befriend
                    
                . The scientific explanation is not wrong, but this mundane
                evolutionary fact does not enrich our understanding of the text in the way that the
                cognitive science in the previous chapters — which was at the scale of individual
                human beings, not the whole species — did. 
Ciccoricco begins the book’s second half on Memory and
                    Emotion with a chapter on Nicholson Baker’s The
                    Mezzanine (1988), a novel about the digressing thoughts of the narrator,
                Howie, on his lunch break. The chapter’s overarching discussion of the
                reconstructive nature of memory is particularly interesting – in part because it
                works as a persuasive example of how contemporary models of mind can inform our
                understanding of character and memory in fiction, but also because Ciccoricco
                establishes that Baker was likely engaged, to some extent, with the cognitive
                science that was becoming more widely known at the time of writing, thus making such
                a scientific reading of his work seem more warranted than it was in the Journey chapter. Ciccoricco convincingly argues that as
                the novel explores Howie’s higher-minded meditations on the everyday, Baker’s
                footnotes, which are ultimately more substantial than the text from which they
                digress, 
                    animate[…] his lower-level cognitive activity
                    
                . The novel thereby enacts the fact that most of what the mind does is largely
                unconscious and, like the footnotes themselves, below the level of what we might
                think of as our primary conscious narrative.
In the fifth chapter, Ciccoricco takes Judi Alston’s digital fiction Nightingale’s Playground (2010) as an exemplary text in
                order to demonstrate how literary study might approach memory in fiction by moving
                away from the outdated Freudian model of repression. This digital fiction, in which
                the central character, Carl, must 
                    come to terms with the likelihood that his problematic
                        memories are false ones
                    
                 is educative because the marriage of its content and form raises interesting,
                difficult questions about narration and reader-agency. Does the ambiguously
                italicised text in this fiction represent thought or speech, from the present or
                past? Is the digital space the reader navigates an objective reality or Carl’s
                subjective reality? Grounding his discussion in the contemporary sciences of memory,
                Ciccoricco demonstrates just how literary studies can benefit by departing from the
                Freudian model in order to better read fictions such as Nightingale’s Playground as enacting the 
                    inescapably context-bound and eminently fallible nature of
                        human memory
                    
                . 
The final chapter, in which Ciccoricco turns to the video game God of War (2005), serves both as a defence of the merit of video games
                and of the need to have a specific language to talk about their unique potential.
                Through his reading of God of War’s complex temporal
                staging, Ciccoricco argues that video games, which are uniquely participatory, have
                the potential not just to make the player read the minds of the characters
                onscreen (as you would when passively watching a film), but also to make the player
                    enact the character’s conscious experience as they effectively live
                the story through that character. As he points out, 
                    if we limit our model of player emotion to the effects of
                        [characters’] facial expressions […] then we have not gone any further than
                        treating a game as a kind of movie
                    
                . Ciccoricco consequently addresses the potential criticism of God of War as a game that has players enact rage and
                violence. As in his discussion of attention span in Chapter Two, Ciccoricco points
                to the tension in the game between 
                    the murderous and the methodical, the need to battle and
                        the need to solve puzzles
                    
                , to undercut any prejudice the cognitive literary field might have that video
                games are necessarily mindless.
Refiguring Minds in Narrative Media is an
                excellent illustration of the strengths of cognitive literary studies, grounded as
                it is in diligent research and deft movement between narratology and the
                contemporary sciences of mind. It also shows some of the field’s weaknesses. Chapter
                Three in particular reads, at times, more like a scientific paper which treats
                Journey as evidence for its hypothesis
                than as a piece of literary criticism informed by contemporary science. Part of the
                problem with this chapter is that while Ciccoricco moves impressively between a
                number of theorists and fields, the chapter is limited to a single game. Though the
                other chapters are much stronger because they strike a better balance between art
                and theory, they each share this problem to an extent. In the two chapters on video
                games, for example, we are left wondering how we might apply a cognitive approach to
                video games that aren’t in the third person, or are in entirely different genres?
                Ciccoricco occasionally mentions some other games but his treatment of them is very
                brief and does not tie significantly into the chapter’s larger discussion.
                Similarly, in his discussion of The Mezzanine’s interesting
                use of footnotes, Ciccoricco makes brief reference to other famous users of
                footnotes (from Jorge Luis Borges to David Foster Wallace to Terry Pratchett) but
                makes no mention of cognition in any of their works. Ciccoricco’s reading of Baker’s
                novel is convincing, but the novel is only understood in isolation, with no sense of
                the broader literary movements in which it plays a part. Ciccoricco’s book lays very
                firm ground for a cognitive approach to old and new media. That one text per chapter
                felt insufficient is a sign of the quality of its scientific and theoretical
                research and of the extent to which it conceptually expands the field. 
