Title:  Machine Enhanced (Re)minding: the Development of
                    Storyspace
Volume:  006
Issue:  2
Date:  26 October 2012
Abstract:  
                This article traces the history of Storyspace, the world’s first program for
                    creating, editing and reading hypertext fiction. Storyspace is crucial to the
                    history of hypertext as well as the history of interactive fiction. It argues
                    that Storyspace was built around a topographic metaphor and that it attempts to
                    model human associative memory. The article is based on interviews with key
                    hypertext pioneers as well as documents created at the time.
            
Full Body Text: 
Machine Enhanced (Re)minding: the Development of Storyspace
Note: This article is an extract from Belinda’s forthcoming book, Memory Machines: The Evolution of Hypertext (Anthem Press,
                UK (2013)). The book is largely based on interviews with the original hypertext
                pioneers. Copies can be pre-ordered from the publisher.

                Re:minding. And yet. But still. (
                        Mais encore
                    ) Still flowing.
                
                    Michael Joyce, unpublished manuscript, 
                    
                
            
Michael Joyce has kept a journal for many years. Before he begins to write, he
                inscribes the first page with an epigram: Still flowing. As anyone who has
                read Joyce’s fictions or critical writing will attest, his work is replete with
                multiple voices and narrative trajectories, a babbling stream of textual overflow
                interrupted at regular intervals by playful, descriptive whorls and eddies. If there
                is a common thread to be drawn between his hyperfictions, his academic writing and
                his novels, then it is this polyglot dialogue, as Robert Coover terms
                it — a lyrical stream of consciousness. Joyce can tell a story. And he has told many
                stories: four books, forty scholarly essays, and at last count (my count), a dozen
                    fictions.Though in many cases the critical works are also fiction,
                    and the books are also critical works. What courses through this
                work is a gentle concern, or even fixation, with how stories are told, with 
                    how we make meaning, as if a
                        caress
                    
                . The metaphor of water is an appropriate one. Like Ted Nelson, who had his
                first epiphany about the nature of ideas and the connections between them as he
                trailed his hand in the water under his grandfather’s boat, Joyce has long been
                concerned with how to represent a multiplicity of ideas and their swirling
                interrelationships, with how stories change over time. In the essay What I Really Wanted to Do I Thought, about the early
                development of Storyspace, Joyce writes: What I really wanted to do, I discovered, was not merely to move a paragraph
                    from page 265 to page 7 but to do so almost endlessly. I wanted, quite simply,
                    to write a novel that would change in successive readings and to make those
                    changing versions according to the connections that I had for some time
                    naturally discovered in the process of writing and that I wanted my readers to
                    share. 
                
            
That novel, of course, would become afternoon , the
                world’s first hypertext fiction . The development of
                Storyspace is, at least in part, the story of Joyce’s quest to find a structure for
                what did not yet exist, or as he wrote in a lengthy document created at the time
                called the Markle Report (see note on sources
                    Historians attach great importance to primary evidence — source
                        material and documents that were created at the time under study. Matthew
                        Kirschenbaum notes in his recent book, Mechanisms (2008), 
                            The single indespensible
                                source for the early history of Storyspace is Joyce and Bolter’s
                                report to the Markle Foundation, which funded Storyspace for a
                                crucial development year in 1985
                            
                        . The copy I will be using here is held at the Michael Joyce Archives
                        at the Harry Ransom Research Centre, dated 1986 (hereafter the Markle Report). The Markle Report was written
                        during the first development cycle for Storyspace, and describes both the
                        research process behind the program and the tool itself as it was used at
                        the time over 60 typed pages; for this reason, I will be relying heavily on
                        it. That said, human memory is fallible, but so are documents. The Markle
                        Report was written mainly by Joyce, and in the manner of any document
                        assembled in haste and addressed to a funding body, it presents a particular
                        view of the task at hand (and sometimes gets the minor details mixed
                        up).
                    As Joyce put it when I queried his use of some terms in the report, 
                            I feel like I’m hoisting my
                                own petard, but obviously I wrote the whole Markle Report; my
                                imprecisions of language are coming back to haunt me
                            
                        . To get a more detailed picture I will be supplementing this source
                        with oral histories obtained in 2011 – most particularly the recollections
                        of Michael Joyce, Jay David Bolter, John B Smith and also Mark Bernstein,
                        who has maintained the code for the last twenty years. Stuart Moulthrop and
                        Nancy Kaplan have kindly helped with some of the minor details, and Michael
                        Joyce provided me with a copy of his unpublished manuscript, Re:mindings (he was reluctant to part with this,
                        but it is used by permission). I also rely heavily on Joyce and Bolter’s
                        critical work because this theory influenced the development of the
                        system.
                ), to find 
                    a structure editor...for creating
                            multiple fictions
                    
                    
                .
As I have argued elsewhere,
                    
                 the early hypertext systems were built to embody particular visions about
                how the human mind and memory work, to represent the complex interconnections that hold between ideas.
                Each system (re)presented a different model of these interconnections and of the
                perceived complexity underlying a mass of information. As Jay David Bolter put it in
                1991, 
                    electronic symbols...seem to be an
                        extension of a network of ideas in the mind itself
                    
                 (also cited by ). Storyspace is no
                exception; Joyce intuitively felt that stories disclose themselves in their connectiveness, and that 
                    we are associative creatures. That’s
                        what we do
                    
                . Unlike the hypertext pioneers van Dam, Engelbart, Nelson or Bush, however,
                Joyce is first and foremost a writer – and Storyspace was designed for writers. The
                image of potentiality that guided Joyce was consequently a literary one; it started
                with an idea for a novel.
In every interview Joyce has given about afternoon or
                the development of Storyspace, the leitmotif of a
                    story that changes each time you read
                    it returns like a Wagnerian melody. Joyce’s writing is filled with such
                recurrences, with images and phrases that return again and again; recurrence is the sounding of memory in
                    air, he writes in Othermindedness
                . As Stuart Moulthrop observed in response to
                this article, the name Joyce is also an echo, 
                    an echo he won’t acknowledge for
                        fear of trading on homonymity
                    
                . Joyce, keen as always to create a self-reflexive eddy in the text, has a
                response to that response) Eco writes 
                        Joyce (the living one) is here to
                            prove that Joyce (the dead and everlasting one) gave us with Finnegans Wake a good example of hypertextual
                            experience... A textual hypertext is finite and limited, even though
                            open to innumerable and original inquiries. Then there is the
                            possibility outlined by Michael Joyce, hypertexts which are unlimited
                            and infinite, a sort of jazz-like unending story
                        
                    , reprinted, without the living/dead Joyce reference as the Afterword in The Future of the
                        Book. . This particular image, the image of a multiple
                fiction, is important enough that it appears verbatim or near verbatim in many of
                his essays on hypertext (e.g., 
                
                 as a multiple story). 
Although he is quick to point out that it
                    wasn’t a matter of just bringing a set of ideals and aspirations to
                    Bolter, and then building a system to do that , the idea of a novel that changes with each reading was obviously important to
                him, based on its longevity in his own work. In our interview, he actually corrected
                my phrasing: forgive this, this is like an
                    English teacher, it’s not every reading in the sense of every
                    different reader, but I said each reading, and I had in mind
                    readers who would go back to a text again and again
                . If Storyspace has an origin legend, then it begins with
                this multiple fiction; in Vassar College’s version of the tale, Joyce looked at his little Apple II in the early
                    80s and said I’ll bet you could do a story that would change every [sic] time
                    you read it. He called around, looking for such software, and it didn’t
                    exist
                . Apocryphal stories aside, what is clear is that as a
                novelist, Joyce was thinking about the process of writing, and even more
                importantly, about the internal connections that exist in stories - connections that
                might, with the aid of a computer, be shaped by potential readers.
In the early 80s, as a classics professor working at the University of North
                Carolina, Chapel Hill, Jay David Bolter was also thinking about the computer as a
                writing space, and about the connections that hold between ideas. His department had
                been pioneering research into the computerization of classical scholarship since
                1975, led by David Packard (son of billionaire computing pioneer David Packard, Sr.,
                the co-founder of Hewlett Packard). Unlike his contemporaries, and crucially for the
                future of humanities computing, Bolter had a background in computer engineering. He
                completed a Masters in Computer Science in 1978 as well as a PhD in Classics in
                1977, both from UNC, and he was a member of the Committee for Computer Applications
                (APA) beginning in 1981I’ve gleaned this information largely from Bolter’s CV:
                        http://www.jdbolter.net/bio-and-cv.html
                . 
As a classics student at UNC in the late 70s, he remembers in our interview, he was
                the 
                    only student in the class who had a
                        computer science background
                    
                . He became Packard’s assistant for a couple of years and worked on his
                pioneering mini-computer system IBYCUS. 
IBYCUS was the first computer to allow the editing, search, and retrieval of
                classical texts in a fully integrated desktop package
                    http://www.tlg.uci.edu/about/titlestory.php
                . When Packard left UNC, he left his computer there and Bolter was
                responsible for running IBYCUS for a few more years.This was really my first important humanities application
                    and it was at that time that I started thinking about the impact of the computer
                    as a technology, which led to my book Turing’s Man
                    .
            
Consequently, when he started working with Joyce in 1983, Bolter had already been
                thinking about the relationship between computing and classical scholarship for a
                few yearsHe had also done some work on interactive text, and gave Joyce a copy
                    of his article The Idea of Literature and the Electronic
                        Medium in 1983. This was later published in TOPIC in 1985 (Joyce refers to it in the Markle report as 
                        some thoughts on literature in an
                            electronic medium,
                        
                    . . Joyce remembers he 
                    felt drawn to Jay’s vision because he
                        was concerned with questions of how the epic narrator, how the Homeric
                        narrator, adjusted stories so they changed
                    
                .
Computing science was engaged in a love affair with AI in the 70s and 80s; it was
                particularly intent on modeling the perceived structure of the human mind and
                memory, imitating nature and improving on it (a topic that Bolter critiques in the
                first edition of Writing Space
                , unfortunately removed from the second
                edition published in 2001). Both Joyce and Bolter spent a year as Visiting Fellows
                at the Yale AI Project, Bolter from 1982 to 1983 and Joyce from 1984 to 1985. Bolter
                recalls there was 
                    a general paradigm of representation
                        that AI was following at the time, which was the concept of basically linked
                        structures, interlinked structures, nets of ideas
                    
                , a concept that was also central to Storyspace. Crucially, he recalls, 
                    the AI community didn’t see this as
                        writing, they saw it as thinking, in other words they thought they were
                        [actually] modeling the mind
                    
                .The research led by Brooks at UNC, however, was really more in line
                    with Engelbart’s way of thinking — the computer as intelligence amplification
                    rather than artificial intelligence. 
            
From 1980 to 1987, there was a second boom in this area and large amounts of
                money were available for researchIn the 1980s a form of AI program called
                        expert systems was adopted by corporations around the world and
                    knowledge became the focus of mainstream AI research. Traditional AI took a back
                    seat to research in this area and in neural networks. In those same years, the
                    Japanese government aggressively funded AI with its fifth generation computer
                    project. Another encouraging event in the early 1980s was the revival of
                    connectionism in the work of John Hopfield and David Rumelhart. Once again, AI
                    had achieved success.. It was a glamorous field, and both Bolter and
                Joyce felt the gravitational pull of it. In the Markle Report they note that their 
                    collaboration stems from, and has been
                        energized by, work in artificial intelligence
                    
                . It might be worth reflecting at this point that, whereas the project of
                hypertext has been all too successful with the proliferation of the web, AI remains
                arguably fictionalStuart Moulthrop, personal communication 2011. . In
                the 1980s however, there was a brief resurgence of hope as the new technology of
                    expert systems and artificial neural networks picked up steam. 
Given the prominence they ascribe to this research, I will briefly explore some of
                the work produced at Yale here. Joyce in particular was influenced by the ideas of
                the indomitable Roger Schank, Director of the Yale AI Project and author of a
                seminal book in AI called Dynamic Memory, first
                published in 1982. (It has subsequently been revised. The 1999 edition is the one I
                will be referring to here.) Joyce picked up the term remindings from
                Schank’s work, probably from this book, noting in Of Two
                    Minds that Schank is 
                    nearly alone in artificial intelligence
                        researchers in using the computer as a test bed for expressing
                        representations of thought
                    
                .
He also spent a couple of years corresponding with Natalie Dehn, a researcher at
                Schank’s lab, who used the term extensively in her work on story-generation
                    programsMatt Kirschenbaum details this correspondence well in his chapter
                    on afternoon and Storyspace; I will not cover it again here. . When Joyce
                first began corresponding with Dehn in 1983, she was working on a story generation
                program called TALE-SPIN that attempted to simulate an author’s mind as she makes up
                a story . The ideal structure editor, write Bolter and
                Joyce in the Markle Report, would facilitate 
                    machine enhanced reminding
                    
                .
For Dehn, the process of writing is deeply influenced by the author’s own memory: 
                    This memory needs to contain not only
                        facts about the storyworld thus far constructed, but also prior knowledge of
                        memorable episodes, characters, etc., in the author's life
                    
                . TALE-SPIN was an AI attempt at story
                    generation by making up Aesop-fable-like stories that were the
                consequence of a particular storyworld. It was a world simulator, and this world
                included the characters that lived in it and their goals and motivations. TALE-SPIN
                behaved, in effect, like an author’s memory. It had to keep track of these
                characters and their specific environment, access the material, and reformulate the
                narrative based on these items. To explain and describe this process of
                reformulation and retrieval she also borrowed the term reminding from
                Schank.
For Roger Schank, reminding describes the association of episodes in
                human memory, and the remodeling that takes place upon
                recall (hence the title of his book, Dynamic Memory). A
                library does not have a dynamic memory; it changes with great difficulty. Human
                memory, on the other hand, is constantly rewriting the connections between episodes
                and changing the categorizations and associative trails of information. It does not
                recall information so much as reconstruct it (hence, re-mindings, not just bringing
                episodes to mind again and again, but building them afresh each time). 
In the early 80s, there were specific research questions that concerned Schank at the
                Yale AI lab: 
When we process events as they happen, we need
                to find particular events in memory that are closely related to the current input we
                are processing. But how do we define relatedness? What does it mean for one
                experience to be like another? Under what labels, using what indices, do we look for
                related episodes? .
These are questions about the relationship between ideas, and how the mind snaps
                instantly from one item to another, to paraphrase Bush. They were also questions,
                Joyce recalls, that made sense to him during his fellowship. He would sit with Dehn
                and members of Schank’s group and 
                    once they got over the initial hump of
                        my being the story generation person, there was this wonderful sense that
                        they were concerned with questions that I could recognize as a
                        writer
                    
                .
From early on in the piece, due to the high profile of this field and their
                involvement with it, Bolter and Joyce evidently felt the need to stress that
                Storyspace was not AI: We hasten to
                    note, they wrote in 1986, 
                    that STORYSPACE in [no] way embodies
                        what could legitimately be called AI
                    
                . Such an observation would be entirely unnecessary for a hypertext system
                now, but in 1986, by contrast, most computer people who were tinkering with
                networks were doing AIIndeed, as Stuart Moulthrop observes in response to this
                    chapter, hypertext turns AI inside out., as they go on to note with no
                small sense of irony; 
                    we may be among a very small number of
                        current software developers who do not claim to be doing AI
                    
                .
Bolter published a book shortly after his fellowship at Yale that would become a
                classic in computing studies  Turing’s Man: Western Culture in
                    the Computer Age (1984). In Turing’s Man,
                he sets out to foster a process of
                    cross-fertilization between computing science and the humanities and to
                explore the cultural impact of computing 
                 Again, the influence of AI is clear in this book; The New York Times went so
                    far as to call it 
                        the most illuminating book that has
                            yet come [our] way on the topic of artificial intelligence
                        
                    . . He also introduces some ideas around spatial writing
                that would recur and grow in importance in his later work; in particular, the
                relationship between early Greek systems of place-memory loci (the art of memory)
                and electronic writing. 
The seeds behind Bolter’s oft-cited and influential observation from Writing Space (1991) that hypertext 
                    is not the writing of a place, but
                        rather a writing with places, spatially realized topics
                    
                 germinated here, in the early 80s, in his reflections on computers and the
                classical arts. The classical art of memory represented information by attributing
                to it spatial characteristics, and similarly, 
                    the computer makes a geometer out of
                        anyone with a computational problem to solve
                    
                . In the chapter on Electronic Memory, Bolter
                writes: The computer…offers us a new
                        dimension in the representation of information. In building such
                    structures, computer memory is associative rather than linear. It allows us to
                    follow networks of association in our data, as indeed human memory does. This
                    fact was particularly appreciated in the oral culture of Greece and Rome .
            
Bolter’s ideas around topographic writing were nascent when he started
                collaborating with Joyce in September 1983 .
                They would later have a profound influence over hypertext theory and criticism, and
                also the Storyspace system; from the outset, the nodes in Storyspace were called
                    writing spaces, and it worked explicitly with topographic metaphors,
                incorporating a graphic map view of the link data structure from the first
                version, along with a tree and an outline view (which are also visual
                representations of the data). The
                    tree, Bolter tells us in Turing’s Man, 
                    is a remarkably useful way of
                        representing logical relations in spatial terms
                    
                . Also in line with the topographic metaphor, writing spaces in Storyspace
                acted (and still act) as containers for other writing spaces; an author literally
                    builds the space as she traverses it, zooming in and out to view details
                of the work, the map making the territory. This is an important point. The whole thing about Storyspace was – the
                    big thing about Storyspace [was] – you could write hypertext
                    hyper-textually as Adrian Miles put it in an interview with the author
                    .
In his 1991 book Writing Space, Bolter uses the term
                    topography to incorporate both its original use as a description of
                a place and its later use as the act of 
                    mapping or charting
                    
                 Topographic writing is both a
                    visual and a verbal description, and the design of Storyspace reflected
                this; as 
                    the line, the tree and the network all
                        become visible structures at the writer’s and reader’s disposal
                    
                .
Many of the early pre-web hypertext fictions were written in Storyspace. Some were
                not – including Judy Malloy’s beautiful narrabase programs that generated
                stories that changed each time you read them, by randomizing retrieval
                from a database (the most famous of these is Uncle
                    Roger, 1986, available on the web
                    http://www.well.com/user/jmalloy/uncleroger/unclerog.html
                ). We might also include here John McDaid’s Uncle
                    Buddy’s Phantom Funhouse, which was produced in Hypercard (1992). This
                also makes use of a navigational map and topographic metaphor. Both Malloy's
                and McDaid's work remarkably prefigure the movement in contemporary e-literature
                toward what Victoria Vesna, following Lev Manovich, calls 
                    database aesthetics
                    
                 (Thanks to Michael Joyce for this reference). 
Those hypertexts that were written in Storyspace had a strange 
                    preoccupation with the
                            topography of hypertext
                    
                . The metaphor also seemed to stick in hypertext theory for many years; Joyce
                (1998), Moulthrop (1995), Dickey (1995), Landow (1992), Nunes (1999), Tolva and
                Johnson-Eilola (1993), to name but a few of the first wave theorists,
                explicitly conjure images of exploration and map-making to describe the aesthetics
                of hypertext, due in no small part to Storyspace and to Bolter’s book, Writing Space (we will be discussing Interactive Fiction
                later in this piece). Our current obsession
                    with the creation of interactive, virtual spaces is a sign of the revival of
                    certain features of the art of memory, observes Darren in Memory Trade 
                . Some ideas, as Howard Rheingold wrote in Tools For Thought over twenty years ago, are like viruses: 
                    if they are released at the right
                        moment, they can infect an entire culture
                    
                .
At the time he started working with Bolter, Joyce had ambitions of his own; he wanted
                to write a book that changed with each reading, as we have seen. According to the
                Markle Report, which was written entirely by Joyce even though Bolter appears as an
                author (see note on sources), he was also insistent on the non-hierarchical and associative working habits of
                writers . After they were introduced by Natalie
                Dehn in 1983, they quickly began 
                    a deeply engaged discussion about
                        storytelling and what kind of associative thinking we each
                        understood
                    
                . They didn’t have a formal model at the time, not like a formal AI-like model or psychological
                    model, just some concepts that were working through in their own
                writing. Joyce recalls that they would talk every day on the telephone, this was well before we were habituaries of
                    email, and that these discussions were thrilling for both of them; 
                    it was the most profound intellectual
                        period of my life
                    
                . In the manner of all great partnerships, the collaboration would change the
                arc of their creative vectors far into the future; Joyce would later have 
                    trouble distinguishing where Bolter's
                        thought leaves off and mine begins
                    
                .
It is interesting to note that Joyce is still playing with the idea of memory and
                    re:mindings in his work, in the
                    same way that narrative reforms our understandings of our world and
                    ourselves; his unpublished manuscript is called Re:
                    minding, Essays After-net
                . Bolter, of course, would go on to write Remediation: Understanding New Media with his colleague
                Richard Grusin (2000), which developed a model for reminding in the digital era: in
                this book, Grusin and Bolter argue that visual media achieve their cultural
                significance by remodeling or reworking earlier media (hence
                remediation). There is a double logic to remediation; contradictory
                impulse towards both immediacy and hypermediacy. 
                    Our culture wants both to multiply its
                        media and to erase all traces of mediation: ideally it wants to erase its
                        media in the very process of multiplying them
                    
                . To put it crudely, we would like to have the most all-encompassing, rich
                sensory experience possible, while forgetting that this experience has been
                shaped in advance by the media that enable it.
When I put it to Bolter that the concept of remindings may have been influential for
                him personally, he replied that he would put that back on Michael: 
                    I think that Michael was always very
                        interested in the notion of memory and its relationship to storytelling. And
                        I think he always [had this] vision of a technological medium that would
                        somehow capture or do justice to the complex process of memory and
                        reminding.
                    
                We might call this a tool for machine-enhanced reminding, or the Mind as a Writing Space, to paraphrase one of Bolter’s
                chapter titles from Writing Space (1991, removed from
                the second edition, 2001). Bolter wanted to emphasize in our interview that he never
                believed hypertext to be any more than a metaphor for how human mind or memory works
                    . 
The thing about technological visions is that they change. In particular, they change
                as they are being built into artifacts. Computer languages and hardware have their
                own limits and capacities, and these impact on the direction of development
                projects. Andrew Pickering calls this dance, this mutually constitutive dance
                between vision and artifact, the mangle of practice. When Bolter and Joyce
                first started tinkering with an early software experiment for the IBM PC to try
                    out some of these ideas, this was precisely what happened; their ideas
                evolved in tandem with the software experiments.
In the Markle Report, Joyce refers to an early program Bolter brought to their
                discussions called TEXT . According to Joyce,
                this was a kind of offering,
                something to 
                    try out the ideas we were having about
                        what we understood narrative and thinking to be
                    
                . Bolter believes this program was called GLOSSA – TEXT or GLOSSA, the names were changing rather casually at
                    that point
                
                    
                        ...I think I probably did call it
                            TEXT at one point but that was such a boring name compared to
                            GLOSSA
                        
                    . 
                 – but either way the name is not important. Joyce was
                primarily using an Apple II at this stage; he soon acquired a Macintosh (not,
                    however, before he purchased an Apple Lisa [using grant money] for something
                    like $11,000, or $9.8 billion in today’s money, adds Stuart Moulthrop in the
                margin of this article Stuart Moulthrop, personal communication. ).
                GLOSSA was written for the IBM PC in Pascal, one of the high-level development
                languages in use at the time Along with FORTRAN and BASIC. Pascal is obviously
                    still in use, but is no longer the primary development language for Apple
                    machines. . The precursors of Storyspace, TALETELLER, TALETELLER 2, and
                also the original Storyspace, were all written in Pascal - and by 1985, when both
                Joyce and Bolter were using Macs, Apple had its own Mac Pascal When we called
                    it TALETELLER 2, we were already working on Mac by that time . . Once converted to Mac, Bolter and Joyce
                were committed – 
                    once we went to the Mac, we never went
                        back
                    
                .
One of the most basic and enduring tools in Pascal is linked lists, which is a simple
                way to store and present elements using pointers to indicate the next element
                (or node) in a list. In our interview Bolter pointed out that he had taken a
                lot of computer science courses, and 
                    linked lists obviously are the key to
                        thinking about hypertext, if you want to implement it in the most obvious
                        way
                    
                . GLOSSA was a basic implementation in this sense, based on Bolter’s
                experience with classical texts. 
                    You’d tab a text and then you’d be
                        able to associate notes with any particular word or phrase in the text. .
                        .an automated version of classical texts with notes
                    
                . It wasn’t clickable because the IBM PC wasn’t clickable at the time; the
                user would move the cursor over the word and select it. This linked data structure
                formed the basis for their future experiments 
                    but only in the sense that it had this
                        quality of one text leading to another
                    
                . 
In his well-researched chapter on afternoon, Matthew
                Kirschenbaum suggests that Storyspace has 
                    significant grounding in a
                        hierarchical data model
                    
                 that has its origins in the tree structures of 
                    interactive fictions of the
                        Adventure-type
                    
                . This is an interesting observation, and Joyce mentions Adventure-type
                fictions as an influence in the Markle Report (,
                although he also mentions numerous cultural and literary influences including the
                novels of Sterne and Joyce, Cortazar’s Hopscotch, even
                jazz music). Neither Bolter nor Joyce believe, however, that they were influenced by
                Adventure-type games, except in the sense that they were 
                    a kind of zeitgeist at the
                        time
                    
                . Joyce is especially adamant that they were trying to avoid hierarchical
                structures . Human memory is fallible though,
                particularly concerning the past - and data models are very hard to trace at any
                rate (they always reflect something else, popping up everywhere like the grin of the
                Cheshire cat, as  points out).
For my part, I’d like to suggest that if there is a technical origin to the
                tree-like data structure in Storyspace, it is more likely to have come from the
                functions at hand in the computer language Bolter was using than Adventure-type
                games, namely linked lists. In other words, the tree-like structures were just part
                of the forest of software designStuart Moulthrop, comment in the margin of
                    this article. . In my investigations into hypertext history, one
                surprising find is that this very basic programming function has been quite
                influential (the reader will have to look at my new book to discover just how deep
                they go). This is a far more pedestrian explanation, almost trivially true, but
                sometimes programming is about implementing the most obvious sequence of
                instructions. 
The first product of Joyce’s and Bolter’s conversation around the original program,
                GLOSSA, was called TALETELLER, a name that stuck until 1985 (as Matthew Kirschenbaum
                observes ). Bolter had GLOSSA in hand
                when they first started collaborating, but its successor, TALETELLER, was a product
                of tinkering together. As Joyce recalls, 
                    We would have these conversations,
                        we’d talk about things, and [Bolter] would say let, let me try this in
                            code, and then shoot back something and say, Well, is this going
                            to work?
                    
                    
                . TALETELLER was an attempt to hack
                    together, and without any visual structure, the kind of associative program that
                    would work for what we wanted to do .
            
Around this time, Joyce started preparing what he called pseudocode, a
                delightful mash of poetic handwritten text, symbols and logical notations, to
                explain his ideas. Given the lyrical, polyglot style of his fictions and critical
                work, we would expect no less in his technical projects; Joyce has always written to
                his own loony tune music, to paraphrase him in Of Two
                    Minds
                . 
In his book Mechanisms, Kirschenbaum explains how this
                pseudocode was eventually used to plan and write Joyce’s fiction afternoon 
                . Joyce generally uses an arrow →
                    to indicate a link, and symbols
                    for various operators, e.g. an ampersand to indicate an AND condition
                    . Joyce thinks the process may have
                been a little more complicated than this, however, and that the pseudocode was more
                like a lyrical mnemonic than a draft or plan. The trope of memory returns;
                    There exist only scraps of notes from
                    writing [afternoon] in the Harry Ransom Centre
                    archive and they are (and were) mnemonics for some fairly complex sequences of
                    the fiction, which otherwise I wrote totally in the system of Storyspace,
                    reading and re-reading sequences, and experiencing guard field permutations,
                    from the first. Indeed this was why, in your wonderful phrase [in the next
                    paragraph], I was hyperconscious of where the narrative has already been
                        .
            
Joyce’s 
                    urge toward a novel that changes each
                        time it is read
                    
                 inspired the most distinctive feature of Storyspace: guard fields. 
As we have seen, one of Joyce’s key rhetorical strategies is recurrence (the
                    sounding of memory in air), phrases that appear again and
                again as the writing progresses, relying heavily on the reader’s own memory of
                previous instances of the same phrase or node to alter their present experience. He
                is hyperconscious of where the narrative has already been. Guard fields control a
                reader’s experience of the text based on where they have been. This is done by
                placing conditions on the activation of links, 
                    preventing a link from being followed
                        unless a specific node has been visited
                    
                . The reader’s experience is thus literally as well as metaphorically shaped
                by the path already taken, enabling Joyce to repeat terms and nodes throughout the
                work and have them reappear in new contexts. Conversely, they enable Joyce to ensure
                that readers don’t access key nodes until they have seen or visited others; although
                the narrative seems to be following a path that may have been followed before, it
                changes slightly at the next turn.
The most famous example of the use of guard fields is the white afternoon node
                in afternoon, the node that reveals that Peter may have
                inadvertently killed his own son. Hypertext critic Jane Yellowlees-Douglas (Joyce’s
                favourite reader, whose dissertation was on afternoon)
                argues this node completes the work for her, but it is accessible only after
                the reader has seen a certain sequence of other nodes; 
                    a succession of guard
                        fields ensures that it is reached only after a lengthy visitation of
                        fifty-seven narrative places
                    
                . Guard fields are a powerful device, and one that Joyce deploys to full
                effect in afternoon. According to the Markle Report,
                Joyce agitated for them to be included in the design of Storyspace from the
                outset, and Bolter quickly obliged in their fledgling program: It was just a matter of putting a field into the link data
                    structure that would contain the guard, and then just checking that
                    field...against what the user did before they were allowed to follow the link...
                    It was [that] idea you know and it was Michael’s. 
                
            
Guard fields, along with the topographic spatial writing style, have remained
                integral to the Storyspace program for 30 years hence.
In 1985 Bolter became involved with an interdisciplinary research group at UNC
                directed by a colleague from computer science, John B. Smith. Smith formed this
                research group when he returned to UNC as a faculty member in 1984 . Bolter and Joyce have always credited Smith as a coauthor
                of Storyspace, but Smith wanted to clarify in our interview that he wasn’t involved
                in the development of either TALETELLER or Storyspace — he feels he made more of an
                intellectual contribution insofar as 
                    there was a sort of cloud of ideas that
                        we were all drawing on in the discussions we’d have in this research entity
                        at UNC, Textlab
                    
                .
Textlab was comprised of three people from computer science including Smith, a
                cognitive scientist called Marcy Lansman, and Bolter from classics. The group would
                have weekly meetings at Chapel Hill, and we
                    would debate and discuss’ problems and issues around hypermedia, data
                structures and the visual representation of writing and thinking . Textlab was a very productive group, and they developed a
                number of hypertext systems between 1984 and 1989. Primary among them was the
                Writing Environment (WE), the system with which Smith was most closely associated.
                This expository writing system was contemporaneous with Storyspace.
The development of the Writing Environment was central to these discussions; it was
                the major project concerning Textlab. WE was a hypertext system built for the PC
                explicitly designed in accord with a 
                    cognitive model of the writing
                        process
                    
                . Unlike Bolter and Joyce, Smith and the rest of the WE team were not interested in prose, in fiction.
                Designed to produce paper documents for professionals, users employed the system to
                represent their ideas as nodes, move them into spatial clusters, and link
                them into an associative network. Crucially, this network was not intended to be
                read at a screen like Storyspace fictions are. WE would assemble the nodes in
                sequence and print a linear document. If the user edited this tree structure, then
                the structure of the corresponding printed document would change. The model was
                derived from a review of the literature in cognitive psychology, composition theory,
                and the nascent field of Human Computer studies (this would become HCI). Bolter
                coauthored a seminal paper on WE in 1986 with Smith, Lansman, Stephen Weiss, David
                Beard and Gordon Ferguson, and contributed to its development. 
From the outset in the discussions this group were having, however, according to
                Smith, it became apparent that: Jay was more
                    interested in the Macintosh hardware, and he was also interested in applying
                    these ideas to literature and a literary context. So Jay at some point said
                        Ok, I think I’m going to set off and do an alternate system, probably
                    incorporating a lot of the ideas that were floating around in this group, and
                    also, of course, creating new ideas of his own .
            
The Markle Report refers to a system that strongly influenced Storyspace at this time called PROSE, credited to
                John B. Smith . Smith does not recall making a
                system called PROSE, however, and believes it is referring to an early version of WE
                    (2011)Interview, 2011. This suspicion was later confirmed by both Joyce
                    and Bolter.. Although there was actually a program around at the time
                called PROSE (Prompted Revision of Student Essays, built by Nancy Kaplan, Stuart
                Davis and Joe MartinDeveloped 1985-87 with funding from Cornell University and
                    Apple.), both Joyce and Bolter believe that WE was far more
                    influential Joyce wrote in an email: the strongly influenced
                        makes me think I mixed up the names of Nancy's program, which I knew about
                        but hadn't used and John's, which Jay indeed felt we had to acknowledge
                        given his work with John's group. . Either way, the discussions
                that this interdisciplinary research entity were having, and the cloud of
                    ideas surrounding the development of what would become WE in Textlab,
                influenced the development of StoryspaceWe do not have space to go into more
                    detail about WE here, but it was an important system in the history of
                    expository or professional writing systems; it was presented at Hypertext
                    ’87 alongside FRESS, HyperCard, Storyspace and NLS.. 
Joyce and Bolter’s next implementation, again in Pascal, was called TALETELLER 2.
                They both emphasized the influence of the Macintosh user interface on their thinking
                at this time, particularly the idea of representing the working space as a series of
                nested levels or spaces inspired by the 
                    idea of containing documents inside
                        folders
                    
                . The way the Mac did this was too cumbersome and hierarchical, however; on a
                Mac the user retrieved a piece of text only by 
                    going into the document folder to open
                        the document
                    
                . This file structure was not designed to be redrawn at will, and the
                assumption was that users were concerned with editing documents, not their connections to other documents. Bolter and Joyce wanted it
                to be more 
                    fluid, so basically documents and
                        folders are the same thing, you can open any particular cell and it can be
                        either a document or it can be a container [for another document]
                    
                . Again, the metaphor Joyce and Bolter had in mind was the writer as
                cartographer — not the writer as Apple filing clerk. 
The Markle Report refers to a meeting at this time with Dr. Kristine Hooper from the
                Apple Educational Division, who explained the Aspen Movie Project at MIT, an early
                hypermedia system that allowed the user to take a virtual tour of surrogate travel
                through the city of Aspen, Colorado. (Joyce now believes it wasn’t a meeting but a
                conference; 
                    If I wrote that in the Markle Report,
                        it is incorrect. We didn't have a meeting with Hooper but rather I attended
                        a conference where I heard her speak about, and demo, the Aspen Movie Project
                    
                    
                ). This system had a navigation map overlaid above the horizon that allowed
                the user to jump to a two-dimensional city map.

                This reinforced a decision, prompted by
                    both Bolter’s initial working paper and the limitations of the Macintosh screen,
                    to present users with a small (but enlargeable) depiction of the hierarchical
                    tree which would largely serve as a mapping space and for manipulation of
                    large-scale structures, i.e. deleting and moving sub-trees .
            
As noted earlier in this chapter, the topographic metaphor has always been integral
                to this hypertext system — both in the interface design and in the development of
                technical functionalities. From the
                    beginning, remembers Joyce, 
                    we tried to find the consonant,
                        physical, visual structures that would suit associative [writing]
                    
                . In 1985, the team dubbed the program Storyspace, a name chosen to reflect
                this metaphor. Also in 1985, they received a grant from the Markle Foundation 
                    to study methods for creating and
                        presenting interactive compositions…by developing a microcomputer-based
                            structure editor
                    
                    
                . Aside from providing a much-needed injection of funds at the time, this
                resulted in the Markle Report, which has proved most useful historically. 
Although this report covers dozens of influences and design decisions over almost 60
                pages, there is no reference to Joyce’s fiction afternoon, only to his ambitious but somewhat unformed desire to create a multiple fiction
                    . Joyce did, however, have a copy of afternoon to present and distribute one year later at the
                Hypertext ’87 conference at UNC Chapel Hill, November 13-15. If hypertext had a
                coming-out party, then it was this first ACM hypertext conference. 
Many of the early hypertext systems were presented at Hypertext ‘87, and many of the
                personalities behind them were walking the halls. It was an exciting time, recalls
                John Smith; it was the first large international conference devoted to hypertext and 
                    the hypertext community discovered that
                        it was bigger than anyone realised
                    
                . Smith was there with his Textlab colleagues presenting the Writing
                Environment WE (Smith actually co-chaired the conference with Frank Halasz). Joyce
                and Bolter were there, at their 
                    famous, but not mythological rickety
                        table, where we sat outside the plenary sessions
                    
                . Andy van Dam gave a legendary keynote presentation.
Apple presented HyperCard with much pomp and ceremony, but it was met with an
                undertone of disdain; the feeling was 
                    we all knew systems that had a good
                        deal more functionality, like FRESS, and we sort of resented being told,
                            here’s hypertext
                    
                    
                . Ted Nelson also presented a paper on Xanadu (All for
                    One and One for All) and Janet Walker presented a paper on the Document
                Examiner. It was fabulous, recalls
                Joyce, 
                    the whole hypertext world discovered
                        one another
                    
                . The demos at Hypertext ’87 were
                    literally at the center of the conference. One big room, lots of big systems,
                    systems we’d been reading about for years but that you’d never actually seen
                    before. There in one room: Ted Nelson’s Xanadu, Engelbart’s NLS/Augment,
                    Walker’s Symbolics Document Explorer, Joyce and Bolter with Storyspace,
                    [Bernstein’s] Hypergate, Meyrowitz and Landow and Yankelovich and van Dam with
                    Intermedia. 
                
            
In the midst of this party, Joyce and Bolter presented their paper on Storyspace . There is a brief note towards the end of that paper,
                enclosed in parentheses, that a copy of afternoon is 
                    available to interested
                        readers
                    
                . Joyce recalls that he worked hard to get the first version of afternoon done by that meeting so he could distribute it
                on diskette as an example of what could be done in Storyspace: 
                    [a]bsolutely. It was written for that
                        meeting, I mean not written about that meeting, but distributed as an
                        example
                    
                . This is a modest estimation of the work, however (Joyce is
                characteristically modest); afternoon was no mere
                footnote to hypertext history, a little example of the kind of thing you
                could do in Storyspace.
Along with Stuart Moulthrop’s Victory Garden, afternoon is arguably the most important hypertext fiction
                in the history of computing. Citations of it are too numerous to include here
                because it appears in virtually every
                    scholarly publication on literary hypertext, as Astrid Ensslin puts it
                    . If there is a hypertext canon,
                then afternoon belongs there: it appears in 
                    every hypertext seminar in the
                        Western hemisphere
                    
                . 
It also continues to influence Storyspace: Bernstein, who has maintained the code for
                the last twenty years, pointed out in our interview that his design goal is fairly
                simple; 
                    [it] has to always be able to run
                            afternoon and Victory
                            Garden and Patchwork Girl…the
                        agenda related to the writing process is less prominent in my mind than
                        perhaps it used to be in Michael’s
                    
                . That said, more has been written about afternoon than any other work of digital literature; as Bernstein put
                it, 
                    if you don’t know afternoon, you don’t know hypertext
                    
                . 
The closest reader of Joyce’s fictions has always been Jane Yellowlees Douglas
                (particularly in her book, The End of Books, or Books Without
                    End? 2000), and several new interpretations of afternoon have been published in recent years by young scholars, most
                notably literary critic Alice Bell (2010) and Bangor University’s Astrid Ensslin
                (2007). 
For this reason, I will not take the reader through yet another interpretation of
                    afternoon; this has already been done, elsewhere
                and brilliantly. I will simply note that the fiction Joyce distributed on diskette
                at Hypertext ’87 did more than just demonstrate Storyspace; it demonstrated what
                network literature could be, and arguably opened a space for that genre to evolve.
                    [A]fternoon was also the realization of Joyce’s
                long-held dream. It is a book that changes with each reading. 
As Matthew Kirschenbaum observes in his own chapter on afternoon, there is a journal entry in the Joyce Archives dated June 4,
                1988, that notes: What is not
                    recorded here, but exists in a series of papers, letters and what-have-you is
                    the experience of succeeding at what I set out to do before Jay and I first
                    contacted each other: to write a novel that changes each time you read it
                    came to be the story, afternoon, which will likely
                    be the centerpiece of S[tuart] Moulthrop’s first disk magazine. (Journal,
                    1987-89, also cited by ).
            
In 1988, Joyce, Bolter and Smith formed a startup they called Riverrun Ltd., a return
                to Joyce’s favourite metaphor (and an evocation of the famous first word of James
                Joyce’s Finnegans Wake). The official letterhead from
                1990 has running water as its logo Letter to Barton Thurber from Riverrun,
                    February 2 1990, Joyce Archives. . Together they approached Brøderbund
                Software, Inc, an American software and game manufacturer best known for the Carmen Sandiego and Galactic
                    Empire games. According to Matthew Kirschenbaum, who went through the
                correspondence between Joyce and Brøderbund, it was eventually dropped in 1989
                because of 
                    what was perceived to be a
                        weakening in the software market, as well as lingering confusion over what
                        the tool did and who its potential audience was
                    
                . After Broderbund, Joyce entered into conversation with Mark Bernstein, the
                founder of Eastgate Systems. Eastgate signed a contract licensing Storyspace in
                December 1990 and has distributed it since that time.
Pieces of editing software, particularly hypertext systems, are not known for their
                shelf life. None of the first-generation hypertext systems from the 60’s and 70’s
                have survived into the modern era. Even what is called the second generation
                of hypertext systems from the late 70’ and early 80’s, the contemporaries of
                Storyspace – FRESS, Intermedia, Smith’s WE, Apple’s Hypercard – are no longer in
                use. Storyspace, however, has survived for almost thirty years; content is still
                being written for it, it still being bought and sold, and it is still being used in
                pedagogic environments, although the user base is probably fairly small (a couple of
                hundred users). This is virtually unheard of in the history of computing software;
                systems just don’t last that long. The reason Storyspace has survived is fairly
                simple: Eastgate Systems has been maintaining it.
It would be remiss to write a history of hypertext without devoting time to Eastgate
                and to its founder, Mark Bernstein. In addition to the development of early
                hypertext systems, 
                    the history of hypertext was also
                        driven by efforts to create hypertext content for the wider public
                    
                . Eastgate Systems has been the major publisher of hypertext fiction for over
                twenty years, and published the majority of what is now considered serious
                    literary hypertext (this is also Eastgate’s tagline), including Joyce’s
                    afternoon, Stuart Moulthrop’s Victory Garden and Shelley Jackson’s Patchwork
                    Girl. In addition, Bernstein has maintained and extended the Storyspace
                code since 1990 (it has been entirely rewritten in C, and doesn’t share a single
                line of code with the original Pascal version, which presents its own conundrum:
                where is the Storyspace in Storyspace?). He has also made significant contributions
                to hypertext as a critical discourse Bernstein’s paper, Patterns of Hypertext (1998) is widely cited in the field. .
                As John Vinder puts it on his blog, Who has
                    made a more substantial contribution to the field of electronic literature than
                    Mark Bernstein? This makes for a fun parlor game if you know anything about the
                    field. You could name individual authors whose works helped to legitimize the
                    field of born-digital literature. If you go with this approach, you may suggest
                    Michael Joyce, Shelley Jackson, or Stuart Moulthrop, yet all these authors were
                    published on Bernstein’s Eastgate Systems. 
                
            
Eastgate pioneered hypertext publishing in the late 80’s and arguably legitimised
                hypertext as a creative endeavor. As Australian hypertext theorist and author Adrian
                Miles remembers it, They were shrink
                    wrapping stuff and putting it in envelopes and mailing it out [before the Web].
                    You’ve got a physical thing with a cover and a floppy disk or a CD, originally
                    [they were] floppy disks, that you load onto your computer. So from the get go
                    it was sort of stamping itself as this is a literary enterprise, it’s not
                    experimental, and it’s not here are some hypertext experiments. .
            
Eastgate has also been criticized for the dominance of its titles in the hypertext
                canon, and the fact that the company sells these titles for a profit For
                    example, Ensslin seeks to redefine producer-defined, commercially ideologised terminology that has
                    come into widespread us as a result of 
                        specified hypertext software,
                            mostly traded by Eastgate Systems
                        
                    . . It is not universally celebrated in the historical literature.
                Most notably, Matthew Kirschenbaum managed to write an otherwise brilliantly
                researched chapter on the evolution of afternoon and
                    Storyspace while devoting but a sentence to
                Eastgate’s role in this story (
                    a small company specializing in
                        hypertext systems research,
                    
                ) and to Bernstein’s role personally (he 
                    maintains the code
                    
                ). Admittedly Kirschenbaum and Bernstein have their own history, and it is
                best for readers to interpret this themselves rather than have me recount it.
                    Here is a link to Bernstein’s post: http://www.markbernstein.org/ELO.html and here is a link to
                    Kirschenbaum’s response: http://otal.umd.edu/~mgk/blog/archives/000087.html
                
                
                    In response to the original
                    version of this article, Matthew Kirschenbaum provided the following reply:
                        My history with Mark
                        Bernstein (such as it is) was no kind of factor in my not writing about
                        Eastgate Systems at length in Mechanisms.
                        Eastgate’s role in stewarding Storyspace is well-known, and has been
                        documented by scholars... My chapter, however, concerned an even earlier
                        period in the software’s development, based largely on the archival
                        materials housed at the Ransom Center. Whatever our disagreements, I have,
                        and have always had, much respect for Mark Bernstein’s contributions to
                        hypertext and his role in that community. (personal email to the
                    author, 2012). It must be said, however, that it was Eastgate’s business
                model that garnered a profile for its authors in the United States and
                internationally before the web, a direct 
                    result of their marketing and
                        distribution by Eastgate systems
                    
                . 
If we have now come to the point where we might talk about a hypertext canon,
                and indeed Astrid Ensslin has just published a book arguing we should do that, this
                is due in no small part to the publishing and marketing of titles by Eastgate. From
                early on, Bernstein sought to find and publish hypertexts because he felt the
                literary world needed some real examples; it was all hypertext theory, no serious
                    hypertext. As Stuart Moulthrop observed, in 1990, Bernstein stood before the
                European Conference on Hypertext and uttered the famous first words, Where are
                    the hypertexts? – a question that is arguably still just as urgent. Eastgate
                was set up to provide an answer to that question. 
Bernstein also developed his own hypertext system, which was operational by 1988 –
                Hypergate. Hypergate is noteworthy because it introduced the concept of
                    breadcrumbs – showing whether a link takes you back to a place
                you’ve already seen. This concept was invented by Bernstein, and eventually made its
                way into the Mosaic browser (Eastgate never implemented breadcrumbs in Storyspace).
                Possibly for this reason, Bernstein was initially more interested in signing Joyce’s
                hypertext fiction, afternoon, than he was in
                Storyspace. As Joyce recalls it, 
                    
                        afternoon was my bargaining chip in many ways.
                        That’s how I remember things. I made the publishing of afternoon contingent on [Eastgate signing Storyspace]
                    
                . Bernstein thought this was overstating the situation. He remembered
                approaching Joyce about afternoon, because it seemed a
                natural fit, but he 
                    didn't expect Storyspace to be on
                        offer. I might have seemed more reluctant than I was
                    
                .
Beginning in 1989, these discussions went on for some time: At Hypertext ’89, I had discussions with Michael Joyce
                    where we basically agreed that we were going to do this, and Broderbund had
                    returned the right to Storyspace to Michael and Jay. So from that time for the
                    next several months we proceeded under the assumption that it would be. 
                
            
The contract with Eastgate licensing the development and maintenance of Storyspace is
                dated December 17, 1990. Over the next five years, a number of hypertext fictions
                were written in Storyspace and marketed by Eastgate that have since attained (or
                should attain, according to Ensslin’s book Canonizing
                    Hypertext 2007) canonical status. These include Moulthrop’s
                    Victory Garden (1991), Carolyn Guyer’s Quibbling (1993), Jane Yellowlees Douglas I Have Said Nothing (1994) and Shelley Jackson’s Patchwork Girl (1995). 
So important was Storyspace (and Eastgate) to the early development of the field,
                argues Katherine Hayles, that works created within Storyspace have come to be known
                as the Storyspace School . Alice Bell’s recent
                book on hypertext fiction similarly argues for the creation of a hypertext canon,
                and analyzes four hypertext fictions that were created in Storyspace, providing 
                    a critical theory for the analysis of
                        Storyspace fictions
                    
                . 
For my own part, I find it strange that recent theorists are arguing for a formal
                canon – it is almost as though we have forgotten the lessons of poststructuralism.
                What, exactly, is wrong with margins and interstices? Isn’t that where all the
                interesting stuff happens? Why canonize it? Stuart Moulthrop wrote an interesting
                response to Alice Bell’s book on Storyspace fiction in the Electronic Book Review: For Dr. Bell, the adjectival niche is a term of suspicion. I
                    disagree, having learned to think of literary or cultural niches not as traps,
                    but as necessary predicaments or premises. As I see it, if dwellers in these
                    dens need to escape anything, it is the niche distinction itself, the overriding
                    concern with separation of specialist and popular markets. 
                
            
This is the legacy of Storyspace. Whichever side you fall in this debate, the fact is
                that Storyspace fictions predominate in what arguably already is (or should be) a
                hypertext canon. The arrival of the Web and HTML changed the landscape for hypertext
                and for Storyspace. Storyspace was originally built (as were all the early hypertext
                systems) as a standalone system – in this case running under the Macintosh OS. It
                was not intended to create networked hypermedia like the texts found on the Web.
                Arguably, it still belongs to the pre-Web era (and by including it in this story, I
                have contributed to that perception).
Bernstein extended the program in 1995 to enable users to export HTML templates, but
                as Katherine Hayles points out,  the
                    limitations of Storyspace as a web authoring program are significant. For
                    example, it has a very limited palette of colors and cannot handle sound files
                    that will play on the web
                 Though Hayles doesn’t seem to realize
                    these limitations also apply to HTML. . Guard fields are also very
                difficult to implement on the web, and the HTML link model simply cannot support
                some of the more complicated link models of the earlier hypertext systems.

                The relationship between Storyspace and
                    the web has never been entirely easy, in part because the Storyspace link model
                    is richer than the web’s and it turns out that for the sorts of things people
                    want to do in Storyspace the richness matters a lot… Guard fields are invaluable
                    for large scale narrative and we have not come up with an alternative [on the
                    web] .
            
Authors also started turning to Flash and to some extent Javascript around the turn
                of the century. We now have a generation of writers who are willing to script within
                Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) – or as Stuart Moulthrop puts it, a wave of Jay Bolters
                
                     Comment to the author.
                . For these reasons, although Storyspace continues to be used to produce
                stand-alone works, it has been eclipsed
                    as the primary web authoring tool for electronic literature
                . Like all the first generation hypertext
                systems, the web presented a completely different model for building hypertexts.
                Storyspace was never about engaging a crowd, and it has never really entered the web
                era.
Bolter has a rather pessimistic view of the impact of the web on networked
                literature, and on the legacy of Storyspace. The web compromised on the vision of hypertext,
                he observes. It compromised on the literary, political, social vision of the original hypertext movement
                , and it allowed work to be commercialized quickly and
                easily. This has its benefits, of course. The web provides a massive new audience
                and a quick (and free) way of distributing products to that audience – but the web
                obliterated Bernstein’s original business model. The whole concept of selling
                hypertext is made immensely more difficult when everywhere literature is given away
                for free. As Bolter pointed out, the literary community often revolted against this, because it was so easily
                    commercialised
                . 
The most famous example of this rebellion against the web is Robert Coover’s Literary Hypertext: The Passing of the Golden Age (1999).
                In this keynote address to the second Digital Arts and Culture (DAC) Conference,
                Coover lamented the passing of a specific body of digital literature – what we would
                now classify as the Storyspace School – and the rise of the noisy, restless, opportunistic, superficial, e-commerce
                    driven web texts, that are
                    about as appealing as a scatter of old magazines on a table in the dentist’s
                    lounge
                . The Golden Age of hypertext has passed, the visual
                usurping the verbal (the margins, in fact, used to be the site for revolutions:
                perhaps this is why Moulthrop is reluctant to leave them).
Looking back on its history, one of the most interesting aspects of Storyspace is the
                fact that it bridged the gap between humanities and computing science so early, and
                that it was taken seriously by both fields. This was largely due to the fact that
                Bolter had a seat in both
                    worlds, as Joyce points out, collaborating with his engineering
                colleagues from the outset . Unlike Nelson and Engelbart,
                Bolter and Joyce were not ridiculed; on the contrary, they both felt embraced by
                computing science. This set a precedent for future work in the area. In fact,
                according to Joyce, what has gone
                    unremarked is Storyspace’s contribution to a dialogue, if not across the two
                    cultures then at least across the engineering and literary communities
                .
