Title:  Building Bridges: Collaboration between Computer
               Sciences and Media Studies in a Television Archive Project
Volume:  013
Issue:  3
Date:  14 October 2019
Abstract:  
            
            This article sheds an empirical light on interdisciplinary collaboration within the
               Digital Humanities by investigating the daily research practice of the Dutch Digital
               Humanities-project BRIDGE. The project developed and tested methods for automatically
               creating meaningful links and expanding archival television data. In the project, a
               high level of collaboration was required between scholars from two different
               disciplines: computer sciences and media studies. The majority of the epistemological
               encounters between the two disciplines took place in the design of the developed
               tools and the user studies to test the tools. The article is based on structured
               conversations between the two central staff members in the project, i.e. the computer
               science PhD-student and the media studies postdoctoral researcher. By unravelling the
               research project as a process of confrontation, identification and acknowledgement of
               situated knowledges, the article shows when and how the boundaries between the two
               disciplines have been maintained, crossed and blurred. The authors point to the
               benefits and challenges of interdisciplinary collaboration in the Digital Humanities,
               and formulate some best practices for future Digital Humanities-projects.
         
Full Body Text: 

            1 IntroductionThe article was written in 2015-16 and submitted in this final version in 2017.
               Since then, some important new scholarship on collaborations in DH has emerged,
               a.o. Max Kemman’s PhD dissertation on collaboration in Digital History and his conceptualisation of DH as a trading zone.
               In addition, we would like to note that the tools in this article are
               made sustainable in the CLARIAH Media Suite that was launched in April 2019.
            Computer sciences and humanities are rightly considered different scholarly
               disciplines and they use different languages, approaches and paradigms. It comes as
               no surprise, therefore, that mutual misunderstandings, unbalanced expertise levels,
               and lack of interest in the other discipline are issues that regularly occur within
               Digital Humanities-projects that typically work on a new technology and
               humanities-based research question. In their anthology,  define this core challenge for Digital
               Humanities research as follows: Mutual incomprehension persists.
                  Generally speaking, scholars and artists understand little about the technologies
                  that are so radically transforming their fields, while IT-specialists often have
                  scant or no training in the humanities and traditional arts. Insight into
               collaborative research practices, and interdisciplinary collaborative research
               practices in particular, can shed light on the quickly evolving field of Digital
               Humanities. What does it mean to do Digital Humanities? In this
               article, we look at the practice of interdisciplinary collaborative
               research between computer sciences and humanities based media studies.
            A case in point is the Dutch television archive project BRIDGE (Building Rich Links
               to Enable Television History), a collaboration of the Information and Language
               Processing Group of University of Amsterdam, the media studies group Centre for
               Television in Transition of Utrecht University, and the national radio and television
               archive The Netherlands Institute for Sound and Vision. The project showcases the
               synergy of the two academic disciplines involved, computer sciences and media
               studies, which collaboratively developed and tested digital tools for exploration of
               archival television data. Collaboration in DH is often, as  states, aimed at building
                  something that works — a tool, a resource, an online collection. The focus
               of the research in the BRIDGE-project, however, was not solely on building digital
               tools for the humanities, but also on the scientific evaluation of tools and
               algorithms, as part of computer sciences, and a study on how such tools and
               algorithms may advance insights in the field of Media Studies. The main output of
               BRIDGE is a PhD dissertation in computer science, publications in both humanities and
               computer science conferences and journals, and prototypes of tools (which are
               eventually developed into sustainable tools in follow-up projects This is the
                  case in one of the current projects in which we are involved: the tools are made
                  sustainable in the large-scale Dutch research infrastructure project CLARIAH
                  (2015-18), see clariah.nl for more
                  information.. This very interdisciplinary and evaluation-driven set-up
               makes the project different from many other DH-projects in which the tools, the
               technological infrastructures and the humanities research seem to be central.
            Many scholars have investigated collaboration practices in the broader setting of
               technology and software production. , for instance,
               conducted a large-scale critical comparative study of interdisciplinary institutions
               based on ethnographic fieldwork and an Internet-based survey.  bases her article on an autoethnography of one team member during the development
               of software. Most studies use qualitative research methods (notably social
               science-based methods such as ethnography and interviews) to produce case studies
               that focus on how members of a project that involves more than one discipline
               (struggle to) communicate, negotiate, and cooperate. In this article we also report
               on an auto-ethnography, not by one humanities or social science researcher who
               observes scientists and engineers, but by a humanities scholar and a
               computer scientist who observe themselves, the other, and their
               collaborative research. 
            Instead of a methodological account of the technical development and testing of the
               tools, we take a meta stance and reflect on the project’s day-to-day steps in the
               preparation for, execution of, and reporting on the research carried out. In this
               article, we revisit these research processes. The main focus of the research process
               was on conducting user studies. The technical results of these user studies are
               already published in computer science outlets (, , , ). However, computer science papers are not (easily) collected, let alone
                  read by humanities scholars. Therefore, this article also shed a
                     humanities light on the results of the computer science
                  papers.
            Taking an empirical glance at the digital humanities, thus at doing digital
                  humanities, we show how the boundaries between the scholarly
               disciplines computer sciences and humanities-based media studies in BRIDGE are
               maintained, crossed and blurred, and to what extent transdisciplinarity emerged. By
               making the research process more transparent, this paper aims to demystify
               disciplinary boundaries, to reflect on the production of interdisciplinary knowledge,
               and to provide a future look into Digital Humanities research by providing
               suggestions for best practices.
         

            2 About disciplines and situated knowledge
            At the core of interdisciplinary collaboration is the very notion of
                  discipline. Defining a discipline requires caution as it has
               different interpretations. We follow  who
               pragmatically define a discipline as a field of inquiry with a
                  particular object of research and a corresponding body of accumulated
                  specialist knowledge (italics by authors). Simply put,
               academic disciplines are created by groups of scholars as a form of organization of
               their knowledge about a certain object. The very boundaries and definitions of
               disciplines vary over time.
            Over the course of the past four decades, interdisciplinarity has been widely
               discussed in academic literature. Terms such as multi-, cross- and
               transdisciplinarity are used to describe different interactions between disciplines.
               All terms can be situated on a continuum: while multi-disciplinary means
               that there is just communication, but not so much mutual exchange, cross-
               already means some more exchange, while trans- means that there is a creation
               of something new that surpasses the boundaries of disciplines. According to , transdisciplinarity goes beyond
               interdisciplinarity as the first is much more dynamic. In other words,
               transdisciplinarity can be defined as the radicalization of existing disciplinary norms and practices, 
                  allowing researchers to go beyond their parent disciplines,
                     using a shared conceptual framework that draws together concepts, theories, and
                     approaches from disciplines into something new that transcends them all
                  
               . Similar to multi- and cross-disciplinarity, transdisciplinarity is not a
               given, but a process, something that is created and constructed over time.
            Knowledge, too, is not a given, but a construction of which the outside-inside
               boundaries can be theorized as 
                  power moves, not moves toward truth
                  
               . In a constructionist view, knowledge claims are a continuous struggle for
               meaning, which makes it meaningless outside its own context. Yet, we approach the
               collaboration between two disciplines and interdisciplinary knowledge production as
               an Actor-Network, as coined by . Actor-Network Theory
               (ANT) addresses the construction and transformation of human values and knowledge and
               the notion of the actor as agent . According to , agents are individual entities that assert force while
               interacting with other entities. They form what Latour calls actor-networks. Agents
               can be both actors, which are human entities, but they can also be actants
               delineating not only humans, but also non-human entities, such as interfaces. Agents
               are always bound to other agents acting together and therefore the output of the
               entire actor-network cannot be predicted by any agent separately. When investigating
               interdisciplinary collaboration, then, there is an interaction between two
               disciplines in terms of knowledge negotiation between agents.
            A good addition to Actor-Network Theory can be found in feminist science studies. To
               pinpoint the constructivism of knowledge, Donna Haraway coined the concept of 
                  situated knowledge
                  
               . The concept is related to science studies and was developed by Haraway in
               response to Sandra Harding's The Science Question in
                  Feminism
               , in which the latter formulated standpoint theory. In a
               nutshell, these feminist scholars stress the role of the situated researcher and
               situated knowledge to reflect the importance of diverse ways of knowing
               for improving the production of knowledge. Situated knowledge, then, means that all
               subjects have embedded positions: they are part of and actively co-construct a
               disciplinary-bound knowledge. In this context, 
               launched the greased poles dilemma: it is hard to climb
               a pole when you are holding onto both ends of the pole. The pole is a metaphor for
               the epistemological question (i.c. what is regarded as acceptable knowledge within a
               discipline): the duality between positivism and empiricism on the one hand and social
               constructivism on the other hand. She argues that a way to overcome these dualities
               is to articulate partial visions, and thus situated knowledge. Therefore, these scholars are advocates
               of multi-method approaches .
            In terms of our endeavour: how is the knowledge building of the media studies scholar
               related to the knowledge building of the computer scientist? How can both
                  situated scholars collaborate, if they can? In our article,
               we will show that doing Digital Humanities research is a process in which holding on
               to each end of the pole is the intrinsic position at the beginning of the climb, but
               that the key to collaboration lies within identifying, acknowledging and learning
               about the situatedness of the knowledge of the self/own discipline and that of the
               other researcher and discipline. Doing Digital Humanities, therefore, is not only
               about using tools to produce papers or developing tools/interfaces per se, it is also
               (and perhaps chiefly) about the process (and attempts) of making
               research and tools transparent by making one's own and the other’s discipline’s
               assumptions explicit. In other words, it is a matter of building a bridge between
               both discipline-specific ends of the pole, walking on the bridge and (trying to) look
               at one's own and the other discipline-specific end from another perspective, as to
               acknowledge their differences and similarities.
         

            3 Methodology
            The article is an analysis of the daily research practice by the two central staff
               members of the project: one researcher in media studies, and one researcher in
               computer sciences, a (double) self-reflexive account . About 12 people have been involved in this project, i.c. in the
                  supervision of the research, the development of the interfaces and the conducting
                  of user studies: professors, archivists and software developers. The
               postdoc in media studies has a specialisation in Film and Television Studies. The
               computer scientist is specialised in Information Retrieval. The analysis in this
               article follows a unique approach as the authors are also the subjects of the
               research conducted for the article. 
            In order to reconstruct the research steps, we used different types of data: on the
               one hand e-mails and on the other hand a series of semi-structured interviews. We
               read our e-mail conversations first, and then the humanities postdoc prepared a set
               of interview questions and interview topics that formed the basis for a conversation
               between postdoc and PhD student in the form of semi-structured interviews. This was
               done three times: halfway through the project (year 2), at the end of the project
               (year 4) and at the start of the writing process of this article (year 5).
            In the data (emails and transcripts of interviews), we look at what we - the two
               central staff members on the project - say and how we say it; which words we use.
               Latour, as  notes, does not provide a way in which the
               agents interpret their networks. To interpret the networks and the researchers’
               discourses, we rely on the theories of Stuart Hall (1992) on identity as discursive
               construction. He approaches identity formation as a process of becoming rather
               than being, a process of identication that is constructed on the basis of
               recognizing certain characteristics shared with another person, group or an idea.
                  Othering, then, is a form of defining the self: when making differences
               with the out-group explicit, the in-group defines itself. This implies that words
               such as we versus them, or I versus you are important
               markers of identity construction. Therefore, we specifically look at the use of these
               pronouns to see how the researchers’ disciplinary identities are being constructed
               and how knowledge is being formed. 
            The process of othering, however, puts constraints on the writing of an article
               across disciplines. It is a true challenge to write an article from two different
               viewpoints and paradigms. Therefore, we needed a new way to cope with this. Following
               Bartscherer and Coover’s book Switching codes: thinking through
                  digital technology in the humanities and arts
               , we believe that a conversation structure of the
               empirical sections enhances and highlights not only the collaboration in the project
               but also the very act of writing this article. While the interviews are quoted as
                  I and you, the article itself is written as we. The we
               are both authors, but as this is a humanities journal with (largely) a humanities
               readership, we take humanities discourse and concepts as leading. For the description
               of the research process, we use the third person (he/she/the researcher/they) in
               order to identify ourselves as research objects for the sake of this article. As
               such, the article is an expression of standpoints (in plural) of which the
               situatedness is made semantically explicit by quoting ourselves and using the third
               person. In the conversations, the quotes by the Computer Science PhD student will be
               indicated by CS (while in fact it is Marc Bron). The Media Studies postdoc
               researcher’s quotes are indicated by MS (while in fact it is Jasmijn Van
               Gorp). The article is written from a multi-disciplinary standpoint, by means of the
               collaborative software WriteLatex, in itself a way of doing collaborative research.
               Therefore, the article is in itself, to quote , science in the making.
            In the following empirical sections, we present a discursive analysis and
               deconstruction of the interaction between agents, where different backgrounds lead to
               misunderstandings but also to interdisciplinary knowledge production. We divided our
               analysis into four chapters which (humanities-wise) correspond with the classic
               narrative structure of Hollywood films: establishing shot, encounter, conflict and
               reconciliation. In section 4, we set the scene by elaborating on the basic
               characteristics of the two disciplines computer sciences and media studies. In
               section 5, 6, and 7 we follow a chronological order, corresponding with the
               identified three research phases in the project: the encounter, the struggle and
               reconciliation. For each phase, we first outline all research steps, then we discuss
               the challenges encountered and collaboration strategies per research step in a
               conversation structure. We conclude with some best practices for collaborative
               digital humanities projects in section 8.
         

            4 Setting the scene: the two disciplines unravelled
            In order to establish the context of the interdisciplinary collaboration, we define
               in this section the disciplinary characteristics of our own disciplines as viewed by
               ourselves. That is, as disciplines are contested concepts and continuously
               rethought, it is important to know how we ourselves experience the defining
               characteristics of our very own disciplines. Each one of us wrote the section
               concerning our own discipline, also referring to existing literature where relevant.
               In Table 1 we give an overview of the main identified
               characteristics of the two disciplines. We look at the object of research, methods of
               knowledge building, research methods, pace, and publication traditions.
            
               Overview of how we define our own discipline
               
                  
                  
                     Computer Sciences (CS)
                  
                  
                     Humanities based Media Studies (MS)
                  
               
               
                  
                     Object of research
                  
                  Information systems
                  Media and Culture
               
               
                  
                     Knowledge building
                  
                  Discovering structures
                  Associative
               
               
                  
                     Main methods
                  
                  Experiments, computer-led, quantitative
                  Interpretation, qualitative
               
               
                  
                     Publication pace
                  
                  Fast
                  Slow
               
               
                  
                     Research / authorships
                  
                  Team
                  Single
               
               
                  
                     Most valued publication outlet
                  
                  Conference paper
                  Monograph
               
            
            The distinction between sciences and humanities is often referred to as the
               objectivity of knowledge versus experiential aspects. Or, to put it differently, the
               sciences cumulate knowledge until a structure has been discovered, whereas the
               humanities' work is associative and particularistic .
            Computer sciences is a science discipline, and Information Retrieval is one of the
               main subdisciplines. Information retrieval (IR) is finding material (usually
               documents) of an unstructured nature (usually text) that satisfies an information
               need from within large collections (usually stored on computers) . A related discipline is Information Studies,
               which is concerned with how people interact with systems and how those systems can be
               improved . This discipline is closer to the
               Humanities, as it also involves qualitative methods such as observation. Although
               media studies can be situated both in humanities and social sciences, the majority of
               television research (still) takes place in humanities departments. Media studies has
               the media as object of analysis, either in a centralised or decentralised way . Media studies researchers use a variety of data: textual
               data such as newspapers, Twitter feeds and magazines, and audiovisual data such as
               films, radio, games and television programs . Evidently, the
               sciences are also slipping into Media Studies (and vice versa), which is most clearly
               seen in New Media Studies, which concern the study of Social Media, computers and
               information systems such as mobile communication. They often use quantitative
                  big data analysis, but are often adding a critical
               interpretative layer to it.
            In terms of methodology, the two disciplines also differ. In Computer Sciences,
               computer-led experiments are the core, as well as creating new algorithms. Computer
               sciences measure and use (solely) quantitative methods. The basic skills a computer
               scientist should master are: good understanding of theory, algorithms, computer
               design and programming languages. For the humanities-based Media Studies, the
               individual researcher is much more central. The researcher’s own interpretation is
               key. Qualitative methods are better suited for the humanistic stance in the
               humanities . Some skills a humanities researcher should
               master are: critical reflection, interpretation and theoretical
               conceptualisation.
            The practicalities of the two disciplines also differ. Computer scientists often work
               in teams of 2 to 6 people, running experiments that are supervised by a professor.
               Computer science is a quickly evolving field that wants to publish results at least
               every six months in order to be first. First, they write a conference paper of
               usually 10 pages, which is peer-reviewed and, if accepted, published in proceedings.
               A common follow-up is to write a journal article on those aspects of the conference
               paper that need more in-depth analysis. Given these factors, the scientific output of
               computer sciences, as in other hard sciences, is high in
               comparison with the humanities.
            Humanities research is sometimes defined as lonely research, or
               as  describes the humanities researcher: a lone scholar. In the humanities, scholars have tended to be
               physically alone when at work because writing tends to be by nature a solitary
               activity. In the humanities, the research often takes place during the writing. The
               argument of an individual (or duo-) based (humanities) versus a team-based research
               (sciences) tradition can be easily made by looking at random issues of Media Studies
               journals as Cinema Journal, Television and New Media, and monographs in the field of film, television
               and media studies. Edited volumes seem to be more collaborative, but the conference
               of Society for Cinema and Media Studies, i.e. the major
               American conference in the field of film and media studies, has a majority of single
               authored papers and does not give the opportunity to include more than two authors on
               papers. For research assessment, some Humanities departments do not take publications
               with more than x number of authors into account, while other Humanities departments
               encourage co-authored articles by giving them more weight than a single-authored
               article. Furthermore, for humanities-based media studies, the single-authored
               monograph is an important outlet of scholarly work which partly explains the slow
               publication pace of the discipline in comparison with computer sciences.
            We are perfectly aware of the fact that our own definitions and characteristics of
               the disciplines as put here can be contested; however, these are the differences as
               perceived by us, as we encounter(ed) them in our very own European, national and
               time-specific contexts. This self-defined overview of differences between the
               disciplines, provides the starting point, the point zero,
               showing where the following discourses stem from and, more importantly, where the
               challenges can be situated when it comes to interdisciplinary projects and where
               transdisciplinarity may arise. The very research direction in which both disciplines
               met and the discursive field that surfaces as a result of interdisciplinary
               interactions and negotiations between the agents involved can probably be situated in
               what  calls Cultural
               Science: a movement that challenges the current disciplinary distinctions
               between the humanities and social sciences on the one hand, and the math-based
               sciences on the other hand. It can as well be defined as Digital Humanities,
               of course. Whatever concept is used, we tackle the disciplinary boundaries between
               the sciences and the humanities in the next sections from the double perspective of
               humanities and computer sciences. The question, now, is how the project evolved and
               how the researchers of the two disciplines may have come closer to each other.
         

            5 The encounter: two disciplines, limited interaction
            
               5.1 Description of the research process
               In the first year, 2009, the PhD student in computer sciences was the only staff
                  member. Research was focused on entity search and algorithms for linking entities,
                  i.e., exploring algorithms for a specific task: entity search. A good example of
                  how entity search is used in modern search engines is knowledge cards, i.e., for
                  searches about people, companies, or locations, not only a list of 10 result links
                  is presented but in specific cases additional information is presented. For
                  example, for the search terms Michael Jackson pictures, links to his work,
                  and a short biography are shown for the famous artist. The algorithms guess which
                  person the user intended to find, i.e., the artist and not any other person named
                  Michael Jackson See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Jackson_(disambiguation).,
                  and that collected information about this person was the subject of study.
               At the start of the second year, 2010, when the postdoc entered the project, the
                  team was complete and could start their interdisciplinary research. An important
                  practical observation regarding the project we have to add here is that the
                  computer scientist and media studies scholar did not reside in the same building,
                  but work at different universities and even in different cities. The computer
                  scientist worked in a large industrial science campus outside Amsterdam; the media
                  studies scholar worked in a historical mansion as part of the humanities faculty
                  of Utrecht University. At the start of the project, they did not meet regularly,
                  as they were also both living in the cities where their university was
                  located.
               In order to develop a new tool, the first step was to understand how media
                  researchers use their current main tool to acquire research material, i.e., the
                  existing tool (catalogue) of the national radio and television archive, called
                     iMMix (zoeken.beeldengeluid.nl). For the first study within BRIDGE, the team
                  set out to investigate how the known item search
                     system iMMix can be used for an exploratory search task in order to
                  compile a list of features that would be desirable for a new search system. iMMix
                  formed the baseline, a concept which is common in computer
                  sciences but not at all in the humanities. Baseline means that it is the set that
                  is the point of reference, the standard system that will be contrasted with
                  the new system. The latter, then, should perform better than the standard
                  system.
               The online search system of the The Netherlands Institute for Sound and Vision,
                  iMMix, consists of metadata descriptions of around 1.2 (currently 1.6) million
                  television and radio programmes of Dutch public broadcasters, provided by
                  professional annotators. It has a simple and an advanced search option that allows
                  users to search on specific fields. After the search results have been displayed,
                  they can be refined by a filter system. However, the search system is developed
                  for an experienced group of users: the broadcast professionals. Broadcast
                  professionals, in their need to reuse material, often know what they are looking
                  for, using a directed search, for instance, by providing a title or specific
                  content. Consequently, iMMix mainly supports known item search and can be
                  considered as a known item search system. Media researchers, however, would
                  benefit from an exploratory search system, a system that supports them in
                  browsing, learning about the representation of their research topic in the
                  collection, and jumping from one topic to another 
                  .
               As the test person for a pilot study with the standard system iMMix, the
                  researchers were looking for a media researcher with no or just a little
                  experience with the search system and someone with a limited prior
                  knowledge of the archival content in the archive, so s/he would have to rely
                  heavily on the search system for support. The team did not have to look far to
                  find a volunteer. The postdoc was the ideal candidate: a Belgian postdoc in media
                  studies who had never worked with the Dutch iMMix before. The team set up a small
                  experiment, in which the postdoc had to do a search on a self-selected topic.
                  During the search, she had to think aloud and this in the presence of her fellow
                  researcher of computer sciences who observed her search behaviour. The search was
                  being logged, videotaped and sound recorded. She searched for Russia
                  initially and ended up with three clusters of programmes for further scrutiny: two
                  travel reports, two programmes about migrant children and two current affairs
                  programmes (see  for a detailed first-person account
                  of the 2-hour search session).
               By then, it was time to conduct research for a computer science paper, as part of
                  the PhD-project in computer sciences. As users the researchers chose to work with
                  22 media studies students (freshmen). They had to find five television programs
                  for three tasks in a limited period of time, by using the iMMix search system. The
                  tasks for the users have been designed, by varying the difficulty in terms of
                  prior knowledge. The three tasks were defined in such a way that the students
                  could not use any of the elements/terms given in the task to find correct answers
                  and had to extensively explore the archive in order to do so. The first two
                  questions were situated in contemporary times, while the latter was a historical
                  one: (i) find 5 television programs with comedians from a non-western country;
                  (ii) find 5 episodes of drama series in which location plays an important role;
                  and (iii) find 5 game shows with a female host broadcast during the 1950s, 1960s
                  or 1970s. For the first task for example, students first had to find names of
                  comedians of a non-western country, while not being allowed to use any other tool
                  or search engine besides iMMix, before being able to find correct
                  answers/television programs. After completion of the three tasks (or when the
                  maximum 10-minute time limit per task was over), students completed a survey that
                  also contained open questions. They also conducted four in-depth interviews with
                  students after the computer experiment. The study showed that the search system
                  iMMix did not provide the necessary support for exploratory search by
                  (student-)researchers (see  for a detailed account).
            
            
               5.2 Conversation about the research process
               In the first year, there was only one researcher. The computer science PhD-student
                  recalls: It was really informatics research; there was no
                     humanities aspect in there. The task has been evaluated on a benchmark set,
                     created articially. After one year of hard core
                  computer science research, the arrival of the humanities postdoc in the project
                  changed the scene.
               The very first collaborative action was the observation of the postdoc. For the
                  computer scientist, it was very inspiring to observe a media researcher at
                  work:
               
                  CS: It was such an eye opener for me. You did totally other things than I
                        expected. What you did was totally different from the way that we evaluated
                        our entity links. I was immediately inspired and knew how to improve the
                        interface and how we could improve our algorithms. I realized that what we
                        did before, making lists of entities, is not that relevant for the search
                        process of media researchers.
               
               The media studies postdoc, however, was initially very surprised that the
                  observation was so helpful for her computer science colleague. Two years later,
                  she started to see what was so illuminating about her very first search when she
                  took the videotapes from the shelves and started to analyse her own search. By
                  retrospectively observing her own search behavior, she understood that the
                  relation between (re)search object, research question and search behavior of
                  humanities scholars is quite particular. It resulted, amongst others, in a
                  reflective article on her very first search in the archive . In the end, therefore, the observational study of the
                  postdoc using a think aloud procedure turned out to be quite a ground
                     breaking, thus effective, way to get to know each other’s
                  specificities and to get introduced to each other’s discipline.
               However, back then, the observatioal study of the postdoc was considered as rather
                  limited: it did not provide the sheer size/quantity that is usually required for a
                  computer science paper. Therefore, the PhD-student wanted to conduct a user study
                  with a high number of participants to have a baseline measurement, in order
                  to be able to measure the improvement of the future (to be developed)
                     exploratory search system.
               
                  CS: I was used to evaluate things, so I wanted to evaluate, evaluate,
                        evaluate. By then, we thought it would be possible to
                           measure how well the old system iMMix worked and
                        then how well our new system works. Pretty naive.
               
               The postdoc remembers that she did not really understand the purpose of the user
                  study back then. Words such as baseline measurement and exploratory
                     search system did not ring a bell.
               
                  MS: I had really no clue what you wanted to do with the user study, and
                        what you meant with exploratory search system. And then, at a certain
                        point, I interpreted exploratory search system as something that has
                        to do with cultural memory. I translated it as a system that inspires users
                        to formulate new search terms; to provide them with inspiration in case
                        their cultural memory is not sufficient to find television programmes. It is
                        a kind of memory machine: it gives suggestions for new search
                     terms.
               
               
                  CS: I really had no clue what you meant with cultural memory, and I am
                        still struggling with it.
               
               For the postdoc exploratory search system was a fuzzy concept, while
                     cultural memory was a vague concept for the PhD-student. Paradoxically,
                  it was this very semantic gap that provided inspiration for the humanities scholar
                  to give a humanities touch to the user study. The humanities
                  postdoc eventually wanted to do an empirical study of the concept of cultural
                  memory by conducting qualitative interviews with students.
               
                  MS: I was trying to find ways to make the study also interesting for my
                        Media Studies research. So, I insisted on doing some in-depth interviews
                        with the students to complement the quantitative results. I did not see how
                        quantitative data such as mouse clicks could possibly fit into a media
                        studies research design. Of course, now I do know. But back then I really
                        considered you and your goal as Other, something I did
                        not understand.
               
               In the end, the four interviews did not provide sufficient ground for a separate
                  humanities paper, so both researchers worked on a computer science paper together.
                  The result of the study gave some insight in the search behavior of students, but
                  the scholars both realized that the quantitative measurements as well as the four
                  interviews with students were not sufficient to fully grasp the particularities of
                  search and search systems of media researchers. They needed a different approach
                  for their next user studies. However, they did not realize back then that the
                     seed (or solution) for a better set-up of a user
                  study was exactly the combination of quantitive measurements with qualitative
                  interviews, as shown in the next sections of this article.
               While the semantic gap provided inspiration in some occasions, it also impeded the
                  progress. There was a lack of semantic interoperability. For example, as
                  preparation for the user study, the postdoc had to create tasks for the students,
                  formulate queries for the interface.
               
                  MS: I remember that I had to formulate queries. I really had no clue
                        about what a query meant, so I used the word key word instead.
                        But key word to you meant something totally different, so we had the
                        one misunderstanding following the other.
               
               A query is a request for information from a database, such as Comedian AND
                     non-Western. A key word, in computer science and information studies
                  language, however, are the tags attributed to documents. In the case of the iMMix
                  interface, the keywords were the ones on display in the metadata field
                     keywords of television programmes. While the postdoc did not really
                  understand why she had to formulate the tasks for the students in a computer query
                  language, the computer scientist did not really understand why the postdoc was
                  referring to tags all the time.
               In general, the staff-members of the project really had to get used to each other,
                  and were still focused on their own field: CS: The first
                     phase was interesting but also frustrating. I really had to get used to the way
                     humanities researchers work and it was unclear how we could benefit from each
                     other.
               
                  MS: For me, it was quite a shock, too. I was used to do my own individual
                        research, to take my time. I was not used to create something other than a
                        paper, and to work together with someone who works in a totally different
                        paradigm. It was exciting but at the same time I was really worried,
                        admittedly. I wanted to write a monograph as end-product of the project, or
                        at least conduct research with the tools which were about to be developed,
                        and I did not see a way how this would happen within the framework of
                        computer science experiments. I was afraid I would not have the time to
                        conduct any humanities research.
               
               Both researchers define the other discipline as other and
                  also talk in terms of us versus them. The second user study was
                  designed while the two central staff members had two different goals in mind.
                  There was only limited overlap or common understanding between the two
                  disciplines. Each researcher regarded his or her own discipline as the most
                  important. For the computer scientist, it meant that there should be enough
                  participants to make the statistics reliable. For the humanities postdoc, it meant
                  that she tried to obtain some interesting qualitative data. In terms of situated
                  knowledge, both researchers held to their own end of the pole.
               The computer scientist, who started a year earlier, was already able to see the
                  contours of the humanities pole and already started building a bridge. He was
                  excited about the possibilities, and started to learn about Media Studies. He also
                  realized that they needed a different approach to deal with humanities scholars.
                  The media studies scholar who started a year later, on the other hand, firmly held
                  on to her pre-defined end of the pole which is humanities, and was not planning to
                  build a bridge, let alone walking on it. The other discipline
                  was still looking alien to her in her first six months of the
                  project. The postdoc was not really accustomed to the computer science working
                  style yet, and was convinced the humanities part of the research (i.e. conducting
                  research with the new tools they would develop) was much more her cup of tea. The
                  level of collaboration started to improve in the next phase of the research
                  project.
            
         

            6 The struggle: a productive negotiation process
            
               6.1 Description of the research process
               After one year of the joint project, the researchers
                  gradually started to really collaborate. The main aim was the development and
                  testing of the exploratory search system MeRDES (Media Researchers’ Data
                  Exploration Suite). It is in this phase that the two disciplines started to be
                  transcended.
               First of all, the idea for MeRDES emerged when the two staff members were both
                  attending a talk of one of the creators of Google’s N-gram Viewer. Within 30
                  minutes the researchers realized that it would be really good to have such an
                  n-gram viewer for the television archive as an exploratory search system.
                  And so, they started to develop a kind of N-gram viewer for the television
                  archive, which they called Media Researchers’ Exploration Suite, abbreviated to
                     MeRDES We are now aware this name does not sound attractive in
                     French-language contexts. (see figure
                  1).
               MeRDES is specically developed for media studies research and has two goals.
                  First, it provides users with support for exploration, i.e., support in
                  formulating key words and exploring various aspects of a topic (i.e., a tool for
                  retrieval). A second aim is to provide support for discovering patterns in the
                  data (i.e., a tool for analysis). As data for the search engine, we used the same
                  large metadata set as is used in iMMix. They incorporated two side-by-side
                  versions of a standard exploratory search tool that contains cloud filters. Based
                  on Google’s N-gram Viewer, the researchers added a timeline visualization, and a
                  term statistics visualization in which the characteristics of the result sets
                  obtained with each side of the tool are shown and can be compared.
               In order to develop MeRDES, two focus group discussions with media researchers
                  were conducted at two different media studies institutes. The team showed them a
                  mock-up of MeRDES and asked for feedback. Once the new tool was developed, they
                  tested a first version by means of a usability study with and tested by 30
                  computer science students (freshmen). The feedback was given to the software
                  developer, who improved the system. With the improved system, they were able to
                  conduct a remote online user study with 39 media studies scholars from the
                  Netherlands and the Dutch speaking part of Belgium. After having viewed a tutorial
                  video and having practiced with the tool, the media researchers were given the
                  following search task in this third study: Imagine that you have to write a
                     research paper on the portrayal of migrants on Dutch television. Try to find
                     relevant programs in the television archive. The goal of exploring the archive
                     is formulating the initial research question for your paper. After the
                  search session, the users were asked to provide a research question and also
                  feedback in a post-test survey, both by means of check boxes and open questions.
                  The study showed that the double (subjunctive) interface supported a wider
                  variety of research questions. For an elaboration on the methodology and the
                  results of the user studies, see .
               
                  
               
               In parallel with the development of MeRDES, the researchers started conducting
                  interviews with media researchers: PhD students, postdocs, assistant, associate
                  and full professors. They asked them to pick one of their own research projects
                  and reconstruct their research process. This part of the research was
                     purely qualitative, and resulted in a peer-reviewed
                  article about the research process of media researchers and the position of the
                  research question in this process (see ).
            
            
               6.2. Conversation about the research process
               Although both researchers shared the idea about the usefulness of a tool providing
                  an N-gram viewer type functionality, they had very different ideas about how such
                  a tool would operate, which impeded the development of the tool. Retrospectively,
                  it was really a struggle; one of the most difficult episodes in the project.
               While the computer scientist started to understand and feel comfortable with the
                  field of media studies, the media studies postdoc had to adjust to the speed and
                  way of working.
               
                  MS: The development of MeRDES felt really frustrating to me because the
                        development went so fast. There was no time for me to really read literature
                        and theorize the tool. But we had planned a user study, so we had no other
                        choice than speeding up. The worst thing that could have happened is that we
                        had 39 scholars available to test, but no tool. It really felt as a high
                        speed train. I was not used to do things now. If I had
                        deadlines when I was still doing humanities research, I had at least two
                        weeks, and most likely one month. I also remember you were always asking me
                           what is the time line? At first, I thought you were referring to
                        the timeline graph in the interface, but then I realized you meant planning
                        with it. And now I really know why it was so important to have a strict
                        planning.
               
               The postdoc had difficulties in following the pace. The only way to cope with it
                  was to plan more strictly what she did.
               Most difficulties were situated — again — at the level of a lack of semantic
                  interoperability. Another good example to illustrate the mutual misunderstanding
                  is the different take on television genres. The problem was that the iMMix
                  catalogue listed about 300 genres ranging from game show, quiz show,
                     quiz, amusement, Amusement (with capital) and so on. These
                  television genres contained subgenres, sub-subgenres and also labels media studies
                  scholars do not use. The media researcher, therefore, wanted to make a new
                  division of genres which better matched the needs of media researchers. She knew
                  that media researchers really want to select and mix and match their own
                  television genres. The computer scientist in the project perceived genre
                  just as one of the many metadata fields of the television archive, just a facet,
                  similar to producer or channel. This view really conflicted with
                  that of the media researcher who considered genre as one of the backbones in film
                  and television studies research. They had a long, persistent discussion about how
                  the genres should be implemented in MeRDES.
               
                  MS: For me, it should be clear how the genres were related to the
                        television programmes; so I wanted a separate visualization. For you, genre
                        was just one metadata field. Negotiations ended up in keeping the metadata
                        field genre, not in a separate visualization but as tab of the word
                        cloud. (see figure 1)
               
               
                  CS: In the end, I wrote in our paper: genre is a
                           very important concept in media studies, just because all media
                        researchers were insisting on it; during the focus groups, the interviews
                        and you during the development. Genres had to be correct; that had to be
                        precise.
               
               The project members had a similar misunderstanding with snippet. It took
                  about three months before they realized that they had a mutual misunderstanding
                  about it. The computer scientist wanted to show snippets of television programmes
                  in the interface. Result snippets are the short summaries of a document, designed
                  to allow users to decide its relevance. Typically, a snippet consists of the
                  document title and a short summary, which is automatically extracted .
               
                  MS: Somehow I associated snippet with birds and twitter, as the
                        words sound similar. And so I thought snippets were pop-ups or mouseovers. I
                        did not understand why we needed them in the interface at that point. I
                        could have benefited from a beginner’s course in information retrieval and
                        search systems.
               
               Indeed, the lack of semantic interoperability impeded the development of the tool
                  as it costed time.
               On the other hand, the semantic gap also had its function: it forced the
                  researchers to define terms and concepts, which enhances transparency and resulted
                  in a better design of the interface. The collaboration was also supported by the
                  fact that the media researcher moved cities and now lived in the same city as the
                  computer scientist’s university campus. They met more regularly, in person, at the
                  computer science campus which helped in decreasing the mutual misunderstandings.
                  At the computer science campus, the media studies scholar also observed how the
                  computer scientists work, in teams. She observed that they are less focused on
                  individual research than humanities researchers are. It made her realize that the
                  individualistic take of humanities is typical for the humanities, and is not
                  necessarily the only way to go about research. She started to see her own
                  situatedness.
               The defining, crucial element for this research phase was the involvement of other
                  humanities students and scholars in the project. These steps of involving
                     users into the project was the key to increase the level
                  of transdisciplinarity. The computer scientist explains:
               
                  CS: And then our first real thing: the development of MeRDES. We really
                        had to find a strategy to collaborate. I really struggled with my own lack
                        of understanding of your field on the one hand and that the users did not
                        really know what they want on the other hand. We really have many
                        techniques, that are very cool, but we had no clue whether our techniques
                        are useful for media researchers. Media researchers know some techniques,
                        such as google, but they do not know what is possible so they could not
                        really suggest things.
               
               
                  MS: I did not realize how difficult it was for you. You had to grasp the
                        particularities of Media Studies, while I just had to talk with peers – with
                        similar background, lingua and education.
               
               It was important to elaborate the group of users from one (the postdoc) to many.
                  The focus group discussions had a double function: they were an efficient way to
                  gather feedback on the prototype and a pleasant way to get to know the defining
                  characteristics of Media Studies.
               The user-centred tool development also triggered some difficulties. The computer
                  scientist pinpointed the difficulty in the development of the tool as different views on the tool’s goal.
               
                  CS: The major problem is that you and also the media researchers in our
                        focus groups were more interested and fascinated by MeRDES as a tool for
                        analysis than for retrieval. Our mutual misunderstandings were based on
                        that. You and our users in the focus groups were always approaching MeRDES
                        as a tool for analysis, as it generates statistics. I just regarded it as a
                        tool for retrieval.
               
               
                  MS: I did not realize this back then. When I noticed that our target
                        researchers raised some critical questions regarding the interface, I often
                        explained it - to myself - that they did not yet see the full potential of
                        computer sciences for the humanities. I now realize that addressing those
                        critical questions within the interface is key.
               
               The media researcher started to see her peers as other, and
                  felt more comfortable with the automated and
                     quantitative aspect of their joint research project. She
                  had started to build a bridge. In a later stage, the critical remarks of the
                  researchers helped her to redesign the interface in a follow-up project. The
                     interface MeRDES was redesigned into AVResearcherXL as part of the follow-up
                     project QuaMeRDES . In the current project CLARIAH,
                     AVResearcherXL is being rebuilt as a recipe tool in the
                     infrastracture Media Suite, and hence made sustainable for a wider user group
                     of humanities scholars. See .
               The remote user study with the 39 media scholars went well. However, it was
                  difficult to interpret the results because humans provided the data: mouse
                  clicks and survey results of 39 researchers. This meant that both researchers had
                  to learn about human-computer interaction, a field which they were both not
                  familiar with. For computer sciences, it is difficult to get sufficient
                  statistical power as there was only a small dataset (39 respondents) while
                  for humanities, online surveys do not always give satisfying information as they
                  cannot ask follow-up questions and have in-depth interviews to grasp the
                  interpretation strategies of the respondents. They realized that the
                  interpretative element should get even more space in their next user study, as
                  explained in the next section.
               The researchers had a strong belief that more interpretative methods were required
                  for the next user study. This belief was especially instigated by the parallel
                  research step of conducting 27 in-depth interviews with media scholars. The
                  interviews were conducted at the work space of the media researchers, so also had
                  an ethnographic value for the computer scientist. The interviews were effective
                  for the computer scientist to get an understanding of what the humanities is all
                  about:
               
                  CS: Computer sciences is a really structured field. My first impression
                        about media studies researchers was that they were quite absent-minded. So
                        chaotic. Like how one of our interviewees explained it during an interview:
                           then the data, the research question, and
                           back, while she was drawing imaginary loops on the table. And
                        also during our conversations and our first think aloud study. Then you
                        first wanted to do research on Eastern Europe, then on Russian children and
                        then you ended up with research on Russian migrant children. Skipping from
                        one subject to another. But later I understood that it is just part of an
                        interpretative research process in which humanities researchers try to
                        understand a subject.
               
               While the method of conducting interviews is common in the field of media studies,
                  for the computer scientist it was a new way of doing research. It also was a kind
                  of social literature study:
               
                  CS: During the first interviews, I was totally puzzled about certain
                        terms. They were talking about reception, audience studies,
                           production, and texts. I was surprised to what extent
                        culture is central and questioning what culture is, etc. I really did not
                        understand what they meant.
               
               The researchers gave a lot of examples about their research, which helped to
                  understand the discipline-specific terms. The computer scientist learnt a lot of
                  the specificities of media researchers. The media studies postdoc realized that
                  her own (re)search behavior is very typical for Media Studies, which confirmed
                  that her own stake in the project could be considered more or less as
                     representative for media studies.
               In this phase, a productive struggle, there were clear signs that both researchers
                  started to build bridges. Semantics are one of the most defining parts of a
                  discipline. Learning each other’s semantics is a conditio
                     sine qua for a good, constructive collaboration. In addition, they
                  got acquainted with - for their discipline - rather exotic
                  methods: the computer scientist was enthusiastic about the focus group discussions
                  for the tool development and the interviews to grasp the field of Media Studies.
                  The media studies scholar started to see the value of computer sciences for the
                  humanities. She was impressed by the efficiency of computer scientists, e.g. how
                  they communicate and plan, and what they could achieve with technologies and
                  programming. Both researchers started to learn new concepts, to understand the
                  benefits and particularities of the other’s disciplines, and they both firmly
                  believed in their joint project to build new tools for Media Studies researchers.
                  One of the strategies which helped to increase collaboration was meeting more
                  regularly and spending full working days in the same office, which makes it easier
                  to ask questions and consult each other.
            
         

            7 Reconciliation: crossing the bridge
            
               7.1 Description of the research process
               The third and last phase could be regarded as a highlight in transdisciplinarity.
                  The research went smoothly. For this phase, they again built and tested a new
                  interface, but this time more qualitative methods were used for testing it. While
                  MeRDES is really suitable for exploration within a single archive, in the last
                  phase, we wanted to develop an interface for contextual research that links
                  several heterogeneous audiovisual collections. We named the interface CoMeRDa
                  (Contextualizing Media Researchers’ Data) (figure 2),
                  and conducted two user studies to test it: a lab study with 44 students and a
                  longitudinal study with 26 students.
               The development of CoMeRDa went much better than MeRDES, although there was a more
                  limited time frame. CoMeRDa enables simultaneous search in six collections: (i) a
                  television program collection (metadatarecords for 700.000 programs, a selection
                  of iMMix); (ii) a photo collection of television programmes; (iii) a wiki
                  dedicated to television programmes and presenters; (iv) scanned television guides;
                  (v) scanned newspapers starting from 1900 to 1995; and (vi) another newspaper
                  collection from 1995 to 2005. The interface has three different tabs: basic search
                  (search in one collection); combined search (search in six collections) and
                  similarity search (search for similar documents across different collections). To
                  test the interface two user studies have been conducted, i.e., one longitudinal
                  and one laboratory.
               The researchers conducted a laboratory study with 44 freshmen students of media
                  and cultural studies. The students got three tasks: (i) imagine that you work at
                  the editorial office of a current affairs program and are asked to collect
                  information about celebrity X. Collect at least 5 items deemed to be relevant for
                  this collection, (ii) search for events that were key in the career of celebrity
                  X. Collect at least 5 items for this collection, for example articles and
                  photographs, about these events, (iii) A key television program in the career of
                  the celebrity X was program Y. Collect at least 5 items about the run-up to the
                  program, the program itself, and the aftermath. To complete the first task
                  subjects are provided with the tabbed display (one collection), for the second
                  task with the blended display (all collections), and for the third task with the
                  similarity display (similar documents in other collections).
               The theme of the course selected for the longitudinal study is television and film
                  history and the research projects carried out by the students are centred around
                  television personalities between 1950s and 1980s. The 26 master students could use
                  CoMeRDa for their research paper, which had to be a photo essay on a celebrity.
                  Every second week, they were asked to complete a questionnaire on their use of
                  CoMeRDa. Every other week, there was a focus group discussion in which the results
                  of the questionnaire and their feedback on the interface were discussed. The
                  multimethod user study showed that the students preferred the blended display in
                  the first stage of their research project: they wanted to have an overview of what
                  is available. As soon as they had picked a research topic, they preferred to
                  search within one collection at a time. The results of these CoMeRDa user studies
                  are published in . 
               
                  
               
            
            
               7.2 Conversation about the research process
               In CoMeRDa, the development was less difficult, also because it was a more
                  straightforward interface. Negotations were rather about presentation and display,
                  than about facets and metadata fields.
               
                  CS: During the development of CoMeRDa, we had a better collaboration. We
                        could digitize a part of the programme guide collection as sample, and you
                        were the one who knew best what kind of sample makes sense. The same goes
                        for the newspaper collection; it went back to the 17th century, so you had
                        to make decisions on how to streamline the collection with the television
                        related collections.
               
               
                  MS: I knew what to expect and really enjoyed to work with a strict
                        planning. I was more able to do last minute tasks. So for me it was a much
                        easier phase than when we developed and tested MeRDES.
               
               Indeed, as the team members all went already through the development and testing
                  of MeRDES, the mutual expectations were levelled. The media studies researcher
                  started not only to see how the innovations done by computer sciences need a
                  structured way of working and a fast pace, but also to adopt some daily working
                  protocols of computer sciences, and to use important computer science terms in the
                  daily conversations. She just knew much better how to communicate.
               Similarly, it was much easier to agree on the set-up of the user studies. The
                  researchers agreed that the media studies researcher was the one who should
                     translate the surveys and create realistic assignments for
                  the students:
               
                  CS: Well, we had a lot of discussion about the questionnaires. Because
                        you thought they were too long and the questions were not clearly
                        formulated. I always wanted to have extensive questionnaires, while you knew
                        that the students would not really enjoy filling extensive questionnaires.
                        Surveys were always a point of conflict. But once we conducted the study, we
                        were both enthusiastic about the set-up. We had a good task
                     division.
               
               The computer scientist decided what they were going to measure, for the computer
                  science papers. And the media studies researcher translated the questionnaires
                  from computer science to humanities language, made the assignments doable, and
                  tailored the task and set-up to media studies research. The computer scientist
                  recalls: Without you, it would have been a computer scientist
                     who gave an assignment to media studies scholars. And then they would have had
                     no clue about what to do.
               Moreover, it proved to be important to communicate live with
                  each other and avoid written discussions.
               
                  CS: We still had some misunderstandings. We learnt that we better avoid
                        to communicate via e-mail. If we started discussing via e-mail, the mutual
                        misunderstandings piled up. Often, we had a meeting, and then you went home
                        and started to think about it and wrote me an e-mail from home: It won’t work. We have to change the set-up. And
                        then I wrote back to you: No, we have to do it like
                           this, we have to measure it!
               
               
                  MS: Yes, we then realized we had to take the phone and talk it through
                        instead of squirreling over mail. They did not experiment with
                        video conferencing. They preferred to work in the same space rather than
                        having online meetings.
               
               For the media studies postdoc, there was one major challenge in the software
                  development. She was afraid that they were building tools that would not be used,
                  as seems to be the case with the majority of tools developed by DH-projects (cf.
                  Golumbia, 2013).
               
                   MS: For me, the most difficult part was that I, or better we, the media
                        researchers, were also research subjects. I continuously had to keep in mind
                        to not make a tool that was completely tailored to what I wanted. If I have
                        to point at the true challenge for BRIDGE, in hindsight, it is the fact that
                        as the humanities researcher of the project you have that double function.
                        You have to be so self-reflexive: on the one hand you have to monitor that
                        you are representing a large, diverse group of researchers, while at the
                        same time you have to give feedback on a daily basis and do the research
                        yourself. It was key that we conducted focus group discussions and so many
                        interviews with different scholars at different institutes in different
                        fields.
               
               In the end, it turned out that the tools were appreciated by scholars and
                  students. Of course, a lot of feedback was received and there is still some work
                  to do to make the tools sustainable (see ). But
                  in general, the research conducted in this phase was considered as satisfying for
                  both scholars in the project. Right after the last focus group discussion with the
                  students in the longitudinal session, all the pieces came together. We realized
                  that we both learnt methods and practices of the other’s field.
               
                  CS: I also liked the fact that we chose for a more qualitative approach,
                        in the longitudinal study. It gave so many insights. I really think that is
                        one of the assets: that I learnt some of your methodologies and learnt about
                        a humanities perspective. It is a fresh perspective for computer
                        sciences.
               
               
                  MS: Same here. I believe that the key is in mixing both worlds:
                        quantitative and qualitative methods. A bit of computer sciences and a bit
                        of humanities, that is. For humanities, it is often - or better:
                        traditionally - considered as superficial to base
                        research solely on quantitative measurements. They tend to think: So
                           what? What do the numbers tell us?. Humanities scholars need
                        interpretation, culture and meaning. Basically: humans are central in all
                        phases of their research process, as well as in defining their research
                        object. However, bringing the humans into interface development and bringing
                        interpretation into computer sciences is a very exciting new field for the
                        humanities. So, I can not imagine anymore not to think a bit
                           computer sciency myself.
               
               Both researchers clearly crossed the bridge and felt quite comfortable in mixing
                  paradigms and methods. If the researchers have to pick one challenge, however,
                  these are the publication outlets. It is just very hard to read and understand
                  each other’s papers.
               
                  CS: Humanities papers are very philosophical and theoretical. It is full
                        of quotes of what people think about something cultural. It is very woolly,
                        if you ask me. It questions your own interpretation. It is so vague because
                        you use words that are not the concept itself. Instead, you use all kinds of
                        difficult words, but not the concept itself because that is the one that you
                        are trying to explain. I am not against such papers, I really like them, but
                        we are not trained in reading them. It costs time and effort to understand.
                        You gave me some books about how humanities do research, about cultural
                        studies and cultural memory. And it really helped. We are not trained in
                        interpretation. As a humanities researcher, you make your own interpretation
                        of the data. That is totally new for us.
               
               As most papers about the user studies are written within the computer science
                  paradigm, the same is true for the humanities scholar. A true challenge was the
                  writing of papers and articles collaboratively. In the beginning, it was one of
                  the staff members who wrote and the other who commented and provided some
                  paragraphs for the article. In the final year, they wrote an article together,
                  with the collaborative software writeLaTeX.
               
                  CS: It was so fun to see that you enjoyed writing in
                     writeLaTeX.
               
               
                  MS: What I really liked is that you can immediately see your paper in a
                        nice lay-out as if it is already published. You see immediately the result
                        in nicely lay-outed paper, which is much more satisfying than writing in a
                        Word document. It was quite a challenge to learn the code, but it was very
                        efficient.
               
               Still, it is not easy to write together in terms of language, because computer
                  sciences and humanities write for different audiences. The different journals and
                  conferences need specific formats and styles. There is still a gap, which can only
                  be bridged by new journals in the field of digital humanities.
               Eventually, when the project was finished it was clear that both researchers
                  appreciated and understood important aspects of the other discipline. The computer
                  scientist could finish his PhD on time. The media studies scholar did not write a
                  monograph, nor she could conduct research with the tools, as they were only ready
                  when the project was finished. However, she learnt so much about interface
                  development and computer sciences that she included many of the assets of computer
                  sciences in her future humanities work.
               Transdisciplinarity did arise, and the bridge was built. Even more so: after
                  completion of the project, the media studies researcher started to work on a new
                  project and interface, but from then on based at a computer science department.
                  The computer scientist went in the opposite direction and started to work in a
                  joint history-computer science project, based at a humanities department. The once
                  so other discipline was from then on us.
                  The researchers did not only meet each other in the middle of the bridge; they
                  even crossed the bridge in institutional terms. Admittedly not for long, as both
                  researchers got career opportunities in the original
                  discipline, and at the moment of publication work again in their
                     own discipline of, respectively, Media Studies and
                  Computer Sciences.
            
         

            8 Conclusion: living happily together ever after?
            In this article, we explicitly chose to describe the challenges that arose within our
               research project. We viewed those challenges from two perspectives, by using a
               conversation structure between the two central staff members of the project. The
               conversation structure enabled us to write an article from two standpoints, and also
               to show how our standpoints shifted during the course of the project. As such, we
               embodied two disciplines, and showed how knowledge claims can be negotiated in the
               practice of a Digital Humanities research project. The researchers of two disciplines
               gradually gained mutual understanding.
            After setting the scene of both disciplines, we identied three phases in the project.
               Similar to the common narrative of Hollywood films, there was first an encounter,
               then a struggle and conflict, and finally appeasement and a
                  happy ending. Other research on interdisciplinary projects
               also found that the first phase of research is considered as 
                  frustrating
                  
               . Semantic interoperability, for instance, was a key problem in the first two
               stages of the project. We showed the frustrations, but also looked at the flipside of
               them: the semantic gap between the disciplines and the epistemological differences
               between disciplines often provided inspiration as they were key in lifting the veil
               of our own situatedness. In other words, we would like to acknowledge frustration as
               a facilitator of communication and transdisciplinarity.
            The interaction and power relations continuously changed during the course of the
               project as knowledge at all levels increased. The researchers got more insight in the
               particularities of the other discipline’s field, thus developing a shared language
               and increasing semantic interoperability between the members of the production team.
               The computer scientist said that the slow pace of the humanities research was
               something they had to adjust to and changed their observation of media studies
               scholars along the way. The humanities scholar learnt to work with a (more) strict
               planning and also adopted technical language. In the project, it turned out that both
               disciplines learned the language of the other’s discipline, e.g. by reading
               literature, by discussing the disciplinary boundaries on a daily basis, by
               conversations and (ethnographic-style) observations.
            Transdisciplinarity especially arose in the set-up of the user studies. It is in the
               user studies where epistemological encounters took place between the two disciplines.
               The user studies are, in other words, the space of negotiation where computer
               sciences and media studies really crossed. In BRIDGE, the computer scientist took
               care of the experimental set-up of the user studies, while the media studies scholar
               supervised the humanities-stake of the set-up, the assignments
               and the questionnaires for the humanities users. Moreover, the team conducted focus
               groups and interviews with prospective users, bringing qualitative, ethnographic
               methods into the common quantitative practice of computer scientists. It not only
               helped to learn about the other’s discipline, but also added an interpretative layer
               to the quantitative results. Especially in the user study with CoMeRDa, in which the
               team used a laboratory study next to a qualitative study, the merits of a
               triangulation of methods came to the fore. Vice versa, the media studies researcher
               gained insight in the development of a tool and learn about the specificities of
               developing digital tools for media studies.
            The most important facilitators of the interface development, too, were the regular
               contact and interviews with the users, the group of media researchers. During the
               development of the tool, the users could direct the developers to desirable
               functionalities and the use of understandable labels. The interfaces MeRDES and
               CoMeRDa could not have been made without the encounter of the two disciplines, and
               the continuous negotiation between both. BRIDGE proved not only to build bridges
               between nodes of a television archive, but also between researchers and disciplines:
               a true actor-network in a Latourian sense. Extending the network from two researchers
               who collaborate (i.c. a computer scientist and a media studies scholar) to many
               scholars was one of the key success factors of the project.
            The project required both the computer science researcher and the humanities
               researcher to learn about the tools, techniques, and methodological practices of the
               other discipline and find a common research direction in which the strengths of both
               disciplines could be utilized. This required not only effort in becoming adept at
               another discipline’s practices but also overcoming a psychological barrier, i.e.,
               abandoning something you are good at to become an apprentice in another field. These,
               together with the misunderstandings and frustrations that accompany co-operating with
               someone with a different background, are obstacles which should not be
               underestimated, especially with regards to the (anxieties about) careers of the
               researchers involved. Institutions, therefore, play a vital role in the enhancement
               of Digital Humanities and should carefully look at the assessment procedures for
               tenure, and specifically the assessment of digital publications such as tools and
               databases.
            Researchers should have some of both worlds in their training, one could argue, or at
               least being able to move in between the different spaces so as to support an
               understanding of each other’s discourses. As 
               point out, this is of vital importance for effective interaction and a condition for
               innovation, no matter how complex the network of actors for such innovative
               performance is.  state that there is an increasing
               number of individuals who have real competence in both domains, but that these are
               rare. What we want to stress is that there is still a lot of scholarship needed on
               user-centred tool development and on methods for digital tool-education such as the
               training of Digital Tool Criticism within the humanities.
            Also, a problem arose in the physical distance of the project’s members. Scholars are
               initially distanced in terms of paradigms and distanced in terms of physical
               presence. E-mail conversations were bound to end up in conflicts. Working in the same
               space, or at least having regular meetings or conversations, is essential for a good
               progress of the project. This is simple advice, but highly effective. 
            A persistent problem, however, are publications. As long as the academic publication
               outlets are centered in one or the other field, it remains a true challenge to write
               for a journal of which the format, language and paradigms are not yours. Even with
               this article it is admittedly the humanities scholar who chose the constructionist
               theoretical framework and approach. The conversation structure was used as it allowed
               us to cope with the different paradigms and the different voices of the authors.
               Still, it was quite a challenge to write this article from two perspectives in terms
               of words and style. 
            For a future project, it would be nice to include a third perspective or voice, this
               of the heritage partner or data provider, and also differentiate views within groups,
               by e.g. including the perspective of the software developer. In this case, it would
               be necessary to conduct individuel interviews or focus groups with all participants
               throughout the project and document these carefully. For long-term projects, the
               problem might be that participants leave the project or (re)join which makes it
               difficult to write a joint article and to keep track of all different voices in the
               article. In any case, we advise DH-projects to document their collaboration and have
               (at least) annual meta-discussions about each other and the project. 
            Last, reflection requires at least a moment of distance. It would not only be
               difficult but even impossible to write this article during the course of the project.
               By that time, we were pre-occupied with reaching our goals, developing the tools on
               time, setting up the user studies and writing up the papers. Only now can we look
               back at BRIDGE and reflect on the persons we were in the beginning of the project. We
               are aware of the fact that in this article we are open about our own
                  selves and attitudes during the project. However, we firmly
               believe that transparency is not only key to research methods and digital tools but
               also to scholarship as such. Disciplinary-defined clouds keep on mystifying poles. We
               have built a bridge, walked on it, but are still attracted to the end of the pole we
               were educated in. So, the happy end of the project is rather an open ending. Digital
               Humanities, therefore, is not so much about the results (how does the movie
                  end?) but about acknowledging that it is a process of which all elements — the
               researchers, the interfaces, the methods and the semantics — are interconnected and
               can view and be viewed from multiple perspectives.
         

            9 Acknowledgements
            The authors would like to thank all scholars, software developers and archivists
               involved in the BRIDGE project. The authors would also like to thank Koen Leurs,
               Sonja de Leeuw, the three anonymous reviewers and the editorial board of DHQ for
               feedback on earlier versions of this article. 
         
