Title:  Persuasive Physical Computing: A Review of David
                    M. Rieder’s 
Volume:  013
Issue:  4
Date:  14 December 2019
Abstract:  
                
                Suasive Iterations seeks to expand the repertoire of
                    physical computing, rhetoric, and digital humanities research in an age of
                    pervasive technology and virtual reality. The book provides a collection of
                    theoretical frameworks with which digital humanists can craft projects to evert
                    the virtual and the real towards suasive ends. Rieder argues that digital
                    rhetors and authors should seek to use the affordances of technology to bring
                    the virtual and the real together to create reality altering experiences that
                    are persuasive and transductive. This book is an invaluable tool for those new
                    to the digital humanities as well as experienced scholars as it provides strong
                    theoretical guidance as well as project ideas to promote research in the
                    field.
            
Full Body Text: 
In a digital age of virtual reality, augmented reality, and pervasive computing
                technologies, the lines between the virtual and the real have been blurred,
                resulting in typified virtual reality experiences — that is, users know what to
                expect when using these media. For David M. Rieder, that marks a point in society
                where digital rhetors and authors should seek to evert reality and creatively bend the conventional experience of reality
                        toward some suasive end
                    . In Suasive
                    Iterations: Rhetoric, Writing, and Physical Computing, Rieder argues
                that for digital rhetors and authors to persuade and move audiences they should not
                be seeking to fashion virtuality as reality; rather, they should be seeking to
                combine the two in novel ways, into what he calls an eversion of reality, a
                transductive process where the line between the virtual and the real are folded together, and the
                analog is blurred as a means of altering an audience’s reality . Thus, Rieder aims to deliver succinct
                methodologies for designing iterations of suasive physical computing projects.
Suasive Iterations serves as a succinct reader and
                springboard for how digital humanists should begin research in the fields of
                physical computing and rhetoric and composition. Rieder’s text serves as a grand
                contribution to the digital humanities in that it moves and challenges the field
                towards considering the potential for physical computing research and empirical
                projects. Each chapter consists of a theoretical framework within which Rieder seeks
                to explore how rhetorical theory and physical computing can cooperate towards a
                means of persuasion in a post-PC era. Following each chapter is sub-chapter
                dedicated to a physical computing project which demonstrates the theoretical
                framework explored in the previous chapter. Organizing the book in this manner
                bolsters its argument, as each sub-chapter immediately puts theory into practice,
                providing a concrete application for the theories discussed.
In addition to the efficient chapter design, a visual aid is present by way of
                images. Rieder includes images of devices such as circuit boards and wiring, which
                help to inform readers who may be unfamiliar with the technology. These images are
                invaluable when Rieder begins to discuss the features of a particular piece of
                machinery as they make the text and the concepts therein feel accessible and the
                technology less foreign. As such, Suasive Iterations
                serves as an excellent text for new media courses at the upper-undergraduate level
                as well as all levels of graduate courses — including MA and Ph.D. classes. Classes
                seeking to expose students to digital rhetoric, computers and composition, or
                physical computing and writing will find this text useful, particularly because of
                the research ideas and projects included in the sub-chapters which provide students
                with applications to the theory discussed, processes for designing research
                projects, and ideas for further research.
The first chapter, For/Get the Digital and (Ditch the
                    Umbrella), opens with Rieder’s appraisal of the art project Rain Room as it exemplifies the hybrid realities he argues
                for. Rieder introduces technologies such as passive infrared motion sensors,
                actuators, and slide potentiometers, believing that these technologies can be
                employed for rhetorical purposes in physical computing projects. Rieder believes
                technology contains the power to blur virtual and reality, leading to a change in
                one’s view of reality. The crux of this chapter lies in his presentation of Dan
                O’Sullivan and Tom Igoe’s term transduction: the process by which action or change is produced, and
                        a reality-altering, everted experience is its outcome
                    . Rieder uses this term in conjunction
                with an extension of Lloyd Bitzer’s theory of the rhetorical situation — through
                Kenneth Burke’s concept of casuistic stretching — to include physical computing
                environments and adopts Lawrence C. Rosenfield’s understanding of epideictic
                rhetoric as more than mere ceremonial appraisal but a celebration or appreciation of
                being. Rieder explains that folding (everting) the virtual into the real is an act of persuasion associated with
                    epideictic because it is an event that illuminates or conceals some truth for its
                        audience
                    .
In Chapter Two, Transduction and Allegorized Style,
                Rieder uses Richard Lanham’s analysis of prose to discuss how digital rhetors can
                allegorize data towards a suasive end. A suasive end, in this respect, refers to a
                reality-altering incident which utilizes some of the affordances of the virtual
                    . Rieder adopts Lanham’s understanding
                of allegorized style to mean when content rises above its associated purpose or the
                argument it was intended for. Rieder provides examples of digital projects such as
                Laurence Sterne’s use of grammatical symbols and typographical experiments. Concepts
                of stylistic invention, magical and scientific logic, and computational thought are
                brought in to construct a theoretical foundation for what he calls A Multi-Stage, Recursive Process of
                    Invention, which is a seven-step process for designing a project with
                which data can be collected and allegorized towards a suasive end.
Chapter Three, Onto-Allegories for the Great
                    Outdoors, shows Rieder arguing against scholars such as John Wieser,
                Samuel Taylor Coleridge, and Adams Sherman Hill, the latter of whom calls for an era
                of ubiquitous computing — technologies that are invisible and less attention-grabbing.
                Rieder believes that these ideas are inherently anti-rhetorical and shows how
                rhetors should be seeking to grab the attention of audiences through rhetorical
                means. In an age of information, Rieder acknowledges that attention has become the
                new scarce commodity. In response, he argues that to compete with the values of calm
                computing digital rhetors should aim to compose projects that take on what he calls
                an onto-allegorical approach, a
                combination of Lanham and Ian Bogost’s perspectives on attention and reality .
In Chapter Four, Plumbing the Paradoxical Depths, Rieder
                argues for a revival of the canon of delivery and a return to embodied expressions
                such as gesture, posture, and corporeal experiences. Using scholars such as Adam
                Kendon, Ben McCorkle, and José Gil, Rieder supplants the understanding of gesture
                and the nature of the body in rhetoric. Rieder privileges the Xbox Kinect’s open
                platform system as an invaluable tool for such revival and goes into detail as to
                how this machine makes real-time transduction possible. Applying Deleuzian notions
                of the space-time of bodies, Rieder uplifts the Natural User Interface that the
                Kinect establishes as a means of capturing and delivering an everted bodily
                experience to audiences in a transductive manner. The Kinect provides an opportunity
                to capture paradoxically flat, raw data, and Rieder elaborates on how it can be
                transduced to deliver a new, everted reality to participants.
In what might be his most compelling chapter, A Call for Distant
                    (Transductive) Writing, Rieder argues for an approach to writing that
                removes the obligation to use alphabetical symbols as a means of conveying meaning
                and instead relies on generated surface-lines to express transduced allegorized
                meaning. He calls this distant
                    writing, an extension of Franco Moretti’s term distant
                    reading
                . For Rieder, distant writing represents a mode
                of writing which removes the restraint of speech and phonetic thought as the sole
                method of conveyance and argument. Postulating the idea of line-making practices
                such as tracing, drawing, and etching as methods of distant writing, Rieder
                supplants the idea that writing represents speech using linguists such as Roy Harris
                and Tim Ingold, emphasizing the transductive potential for line-making as rhetorical
                practice.
In the final chapter, After the Bookish Era of the PC,
                Rieder leaves readers with his hope for the future, of digital rhetors and distant
                writers allegorizing data for transductive purposes. Rieder reflects on the
                technological relationship in Spike Jonze’s film Her
                and how it relates to the new post-PC
                    era and the
                    post-human-reality we are headed towards . He encourages scholars in the field to take a chance at creating a
                physical computing project, expressing hope that a day may come when such projects
                can be recognized as stand-alone scholarship and that more digital rhetors
                and authors would seek to explore the available means of persuasion in physical
                computing.
Perhaps the greatest strength of Rieder’s text is its insistence on exploration and
                experimentation. His seven-step recursive process of invention presents an
                invaluable heuristic of sorts with which digital rhetors can explore the limitations
                and potential of their physical computing projects. Another major strength is its
                accessibility and descriptive writing style. Rieder’s concision and clarity
                strengthen his argument as readers will find little trouble grasping his concepts.
                There is, however, an apparent limitation to his text. While not entirely unheard
                of, his stacked abstractions make for a very broad and open-ended scope. Because the
                scope is so broad and designed from the theorists he has chosen, readers may find
                themselves feeling limited by his abstractions to then apply his research
                methods.
Suasive Iterations is a strong text in that it urges
                digital humanists to consider the potentialities of physical computing as a means of
                suasive, rhetorical persuasion. To that end, Rieder negotiates the limits of writing
                and rhetoric and pushes them into the field of physical computing, urging
                interdisciplinary research and projects. The organization of the text makes for an
                accessible read for new scholars looking to find a conversation to join and the
                means with which to turn their inventive ideas into research endeavors and projects.
                As such, this text marks a pivotal turn for the digital humanities, documenting
                prospective change in a field — rhetoric and composition — which urges readers to
                explore and desire to capitalize on the innovative nature of technology through
                data-driven, empirical research.
