Title:  Raising Visibility in the Digital Humanities
                    Landscape: Academic Engagement and the Question of the Library’s Role
Volume:  013
Issue:  2
Date:  01 August 2019
Abstract:  
                Academic libraries have an important role to play in supporting digital
                    humanities projects in their communities. Librarians at Stony Brook University
                    Libraries host Open Mic events for digital humanities researchers, teachers, and
                    students on campus.  Inspired by a desire to better serve digital humanists with
                    existing projects, this event was initially organized to increase the visibility
                    of scholars and students with nascent projects and connect these digital
                    humanists to library supported resources and to one another. For the Libraries,
                    the Open Mic was an opportunity to understand the scope and practices of the
                    digital humanities community at Stony Brook, and to identify ways to make
                    meaningful interventions.   An open mic is a uniquely suitable event format in
                    that it embodies a dynamic, permissive, multidisciplinary presentation space
                    that is as much for exercising new and ongoing research (and technologies) as it
                    is for making discoveries and connections.  The success of these events can be
                    measured in the establishment of the University Libraries as a nexus for digital
                    humanities work, consultations, instruction, workshops, and community on a
                    campus without a designated digital humanities center.   The digital humanities
                    Open Mic event at Stony Brook University locates the digital humanities within
                    the library’s repertoire, while signaling that the library is — in a number of
                    essential ways — open.
            
Full Body Text: 


                Introduction
                 The digital humanities are problematic to place. In his explanation of the
                    visionary aspects of the digital humanities, Patrik Svensson suggests that the interdisciplinarity of the
                    discipline disrupts traditional academic structures. Supporting digital
                    humanities efforts requires an organizational and budgetary structure that
                    universities, siloed into academic departments, are not equipped to support. The
                    academic library, however, transcends some of these traditional boundaries and
                    can be a setting for digital humanities encounters. The unique position of the
                    library as a cross-disciplinary resource can provide space and structure for
                    interdisciplinary connection. The library is the right place to develop digital
                    humanities programing because it has the capacity for multi-view support of
                    projects from their early stages and can facilitate interdisciplinary
                    collaboration.
                With flexible spaces, information resources, and systems for discovering,
                    curating, and preserving information, the library deliberately weaves expertise
                    throughout departments and disciplines. Programs, such as lecture series,
                    workshops, and more informal events, are an important strategy to make visible
                    the library’s potential as an intellectual, pedagogical, and practical center
                    for digital humanities work on campus. Programming raises the library’s profile
                    while also highlighting the problems it faces as a campus entity engaged in the
                    digital humanities, as well as potential strategies to counter them. One key
                    issue is the lack of spaces on campus, both physical and intellectual, for more
                    casual interdisciplinary engagement at the early stage of research or teaching
                    projects in the digital humanities. This lacuna underscores the need to
                    communicate the library’s potential to campus stakeholders, as well as to
                    present it to them in a legible way capable of inspiring collaboration.
                    Librarians at Stony Brook University have taken steps, through instruction,
                    programming, and collaboration, to raise the profile of the library as a nexus
                    of digital humanities activity. This has afforded the library the opportunity to
                    question the role of librarians in digital humanities research, as well as the
                    ways in which digital humanities research enters into dialogue with the
                    interdisciplinarity and modularity of the academic library. As a result of the
                    increased visibility of the library to the digital humanities community at Stony
                    Brook University, librarians formed a working group to combine their talents and
                    expertise in order to provide a menu of services and support which transcends
                    the expertise of any individual member of the group. The synergy and
                    collaborative energy of this group enables librarians to demonstrate their
                    ability to play a broader, more visible role in digital humanities research and
                    to function as leaders in this dynamic field.
                This programmatic, multifaceted commitment to creating a digital humanities
                    presence in the library draws its energy, focus, and scholarly network through
                    formal and informal programming. Informal events based around networking and
                    sharing unfinished work in particular are a uniquely suitable format in that
                    they embody a dynamic, permissive, multidisciplinary presentation space that is
                    as meaningful for exercising new and ongoing research (and technologies) as it
                    is for making discoveries and connections. These events, at which faculty and
                    students are invited to give lightning talks about ongoing research, or simply
                    to listen and learn, provided a foundation on which to build the library’s
                    digital humanities program. The openness, inclusivity, and visibility of these
                    events complement and enhance the library’s digital humanities consultation and
                    instruction services, putting librarians in touch with faculty and students in
                    need of support. Additionally, programming and outreach contribute to the
                    visible of the library while simultaneously privileging its interdisciplinarity
                    and the flexibility of its services, spaces, and collections as they are
                    tailored to digital humanities research and teaching.
                This article discusses the programming, consultations, instruction sessions,
                    workshops, and working group within the context of collaborative and
                    interdisciplinary work in the digital humanities. In addition to providing an
                    outreach template for academic librarians seeking a resource-light introduction
                    to digital humanities projects and researchers on their campuses, this
                    discussion draws into relief the ways in which the digital humanities challenges
                    and reconditions the role and visibility of the librarian as consultant and
                    collaborator. This forms part of a discourse on the nature of collaboration in
                    the digital humanities and on the library as an interdisciplinary space capable
                    of facilitating and engaging in multimodal research and practice. The digital
                    humanities content at Stony Brook University locates the digital humanities
                    within the library’s repertoire, while signaling that the library is — in a
                    number of essential ways — open.
            

                Library Services and the Digital Humanities
                The digital humanities programming and services at Stony Brook University
                    Libraries provide an opportunity to discuss and problematize the ways in which
                    programming and outreach can help libraries to understand the needs of their
                    digital humanities constituencies. The professional literature is replete with
                    examples of the complex relationship between libraries and digital humanists, as
                    well as the exciting, yet frightening, possibilities of tailoring this dynamic
                    to fit the needs of an individual campus. As academic libraries engage with the
                    digital humanities on their campuses, they are faced with a decision about the
                    degree of involvement they have the capacity to provide. Some librarians are
                    consultants, offering advice to researchers regarding data curation, digital
                    preservation, and GIS or text-mining technologies. Other librarians position
                    themselves as active practioners and partners in the research process, becoming
                    engaged in digital humanities projects on grant applications and as co-authors.
                    Beyond this dichotomy exist other considerations which must be addressed by
                    libraries, including building collections that are mindful of the needs of
                    digital humanists. This can include data visualization and GIS software, or
                    advocating for text-mining rights in digital collections.
                After decades of development, experimentation, and growth, many digital humanists
                    point to the value of considering the digital humanities not as an umbrella, but
                    as a rich, diverse, and sometimes unrelated gathering of research practices
                    which bring the humanities into contact with the empirical . This approach tends to destabilize the notion
                    of a monolithic digital humanities in favor of a discussion of individualized
                    research practices and tools intended to promote contact with cultural objects,
                    interdisciplinary, collaboration, and new interpretations of existing corpora.
                    The academic library is ideally situated at the crossroads of these concepts,
                    and has an important intellectual and practical role to play in the continued
                    development of the digital humanities. Kirschenbaum’s foundational essay
                    considers the digital humanities primarily from the perspective of English
                    departments, though his observations regarding the nature of work in the digital
                    humanities are extremely applicable to the interdisciplinary, flexible academic
                    library. Indeed, other chapters in the same edited volume, Debates in the Digital Humanities, as well as the contributions in
                    the 2016 edition, underscore similar points by emphasizing the simultaneously
                    problematic and opportunity-rich dynamic between digital humanists, the
                    humanities, and libraries.
                In many ways, the flexibility of the library, its visibility on campus, and the
                    intersectionality of its mission and philosophy render it both neutral and
                    uniquely suitable for early-stage thought. This is reinforced by the library’s
                    frequently consultative and pedagogical role in supporting the digital
                    humanities on campus. Librarians have been extending the invitation to their
                    liaison departments and collaborating with faculty members in their disciplines
                    to produce and support digital humanities projects. This ongoing conversation
                    between librarians, non-library faculty members, and students is reflected in
                    the openness, creativity, and collaboration inherent in library spaces for the
                    digital humanities. That these outreach strategies are successful — even for
                    those who do not attend — is evidenced by the increased visibility of the
                    library in the digital humanities community on campus, as well as the increase
                    in requests for instruction, collaboration, and consultations.
                In order to facilitate extended collaboration, Stony Brook University Librarians
                    offer workshops on topics, tools, and practices of use to scholars working in
                    the digital humanities, placed in context by the needs that we observe when
                    working with researchers during and after programs. Examples include a workshop
                    for digital humanists who are interested in incorporating text mining as a
                    research tool, but who may lack the technical background to create their own
                    programs. Using a freely accessible text mining tool, Stony Brook University
                    librarians helped to demystify an important digital humanities practice and to
                    encourage humanists to use it to support their research. Workshops dedicated to
                    other visualization tools, have been popular with students and researchers
                    interested in learning to visualize their data in creative and impactful ways.
                    These two examples illustrate a commitment to providing in-depth, tailored
                    instruction on using digital humanities tools. However, they are also indicative
                    of the ways in which digital humanities work is changing the role of the
                    librarian in research. Workshops offer a platform for librarians to demonstrate
                    their expertise and to share it with a broader audience. Because these events
                    are publicized to the campus community, they also contribute to the libraries’
                    growing reputation for and visibility as a digital humanities space. Librarians
                    plan workshop content by expanding their own technical and research skills, with
                    the end result that digital humanities workshops carry the dual benefit of
                    improving library services in the digital humanities while simultaneously
                    enhancing awareness on campus of the library as a resource and as a leader in
                    this area. Evidence of these phenomena can be observed in the feedback loop
                    which exists between the advertisement of workshops, workshop attendance or
                    non-attendance, and subsequent requests for individual consultations with
                    librarians.
                Librarians also teach course-embedded workshops on creating digital humanities
                    content. It is important to note that requests for these sessions are typically
                    inspired by instructor participation in, or awareness of, another digital
                    humanities event at the library, such as an Open Mic or a workshop. By
                    participating in undergraduate- and graduate- level instruction in topics such
                    as multimodal storytelling, digital humanities tools, open textual corpora, and
                    the role of the library, librarians elucidate the work that they are already
                    doing to support this broad and varied field. Additionally, instruction sessions
                    offer the benefit of introducing the library and librarians to students who are
                    already interested in learning more about the field. This classroom connection
                    has inspired requests for research consultations and further support.
                An unforeseen benefit of librarian participation in digital humanities courses,
                    particularly in those at the graduate level, has been the increased visibility
                    of the ways in which digital humanities as a mode of inquiry can enhance or
                    inflect the careers of early career scholars working in humanities fields. The
                    opportunity to become involved in graduate research in the digital humanities is
                    also a chance to demystify librarianship, particularly technically-inflected
                    librarianship, to a group of students who may be interested in pursuing a career
                    outside of the professoriate as it is traditionally conceived.
                Taken together, the strategies used to keep in touch with the digital humanities
                    community at Stony Brook University, in addition and subsequent to the start of
                    the Open Mic events series, render visible key questions in the role of
                    librarians in the digital humanities.
            

                Cultivating Visibility through Programming
                In order to gain the information necessary to identify and decide how to brand
                    their role in emerging research, librarians need to build strong relationships
                    with researchers, teachers, and students on their campuses. This is particularly
                    important in a digital humanities context because of the inherent
                    interdisciplinarity of the field, as well as the variety of practices which can,
                    are, or could be identified as digital humanities.
                To plan and promote the digital humanities in the library, librarians at Stony
                    Brook University drew on examples from the literature. Though there is no direct
                    parallel, many universities have successfully engaged their communities in open
                    digital humanities activities aimed at creating communities of practice in
                    library spaces. In 2015, Arianne Hartsell-Gundy, Laura Braunstein, and Liorah
                    Golomb edited a volume entitled, Digital Humanities in the
                        Library: Challenges and Opportunities for Subject Specialists. In
                    many ways, the contributed essays in this book reflect the inherent overlaps,
                    tensions, and opportunities in the relationship between the digital humanities
                    and the library. Importantly, they also place this dynamic within the context of
                    the broader role of the liaison librarian, with its emphasis on forming close
                    relationships with academic departments in order to provide tailored service.
                    This concept is particularly important in the context of the digital humanities
                    because it is a field which challenges the liaison relationship to expand toward
                    collaboration. Other studies treat this theme from a perspective which
                    emphasizes the nature of collaboration itself. Developing informal communities
                    was one of the themes identified by Hannah Rasmussen, Brian Croxall, and Jessica
                    Otis in their interviews with librarians engaged in digital humanities work.
                    They argue that these context-specific, informal communities of practice are a
                    good fit for the protean nature of digital humanities practice .
                Harriett E. Green’s article in Library Quarterly
                     explores five examples of digital humanities
                    partnerships, including a project at the University of Virginia (UVA) that began
                    in 1992 with the creation of a dedicated space for electronic text encoding
                    called the Etext Center. Since then, UVA has rebranded as the Scholars’ Lab and expanded the center in line with its
                    mission of digital humanities research and development. In her article about the
                    role of the Scholars’ Lab in UVA’s digital humanities production, Bethany
                    Nowviskie asks whether library centers of the digital humanities are uniquely
                    able to demonstrate many possible paths, that is, by
                        walking them, and by sharing narratives of failure, success, and ongoing
                        experimentation?
                    . This concept of creating a space of
                    digital humanities connection and experimentation in the exploratory context of
                    the library is particularly relevant to the design of the Digital Humanities
                    Open Mic events at Stony Brook. The Open Mic event was designed to create a
                    space in the Library where students and faculty could encounter one another and
                    produce organic collaborations. Unlike the Scholars’ Lab, Stony Brook’s space is
                    not dedicated full time to this purpose, but the missions are alike.
                The creation of experimental and research-oriented spaces for the digital
                    humanities is one of the core advantages of hosting these activities in the
                    library rather than in academic departments. Chris Alen Sula  found a great overlap between the work that libraries
                    already seek to do to build collections, support scholarship, and provide
                    development opportunities in digital settings and the work involved in producing
                    and supporting digital humanities content. The role that librarians play in the
                    digital humanities process differs greatly between institutions, though Miriam
                    Posner  makes the case that librarians should act as
                    collaborators rather than supporters of digital humanities projects. She also
                    highlights several challenges to this model including lack of institutional
                    support, training opportunities, and incentives for librarians. SUNY Potsdam
                    College also experienced challenges in marketing digital humanities events but
                    found success in appealing to faculty who then promoted the event to their
                    students . Certainly, most institutions are not
                    enabled to support initiatives as complex as UVA’s Scholars’ Lab, which makes initiatives with low barrier to entry
                    particularly valuable to libraries facing these challenges.
                Several other low-burden methods are outlined in the article Evolving in Common: Creating Mutually Supportive Relationships Between
                        Libraries and the Digital Humanities including participating in the
                    digital humanities conversation in larger online communities via Twitter,
                    listservs, and online resources like the Digital Research Tools (DiRT) Wiki . Though Stony Brook’s digital humanities events
                    were promoted via social media, using these platforms to engage with the greater
                    digital humanities conversation is a good future direction. Like the in-person
                    event, digital platforms are an effective way to make connections within the
                    University and with outside researchers working on similar projects.
                Digital humanities programs and spaces are opportunities to explore and discover
                    new boundaries to the very nature of librarian-faculty-student collaboration. By
                    engaging outside of the classroom and off the reference desk, librarians change the conversation
                     with faculty and students through
                    demonstrations of their expertise and scholarship beyond the course-integrated
                    and supporting roles they typically play.
            

                Leveraging Librarian Skills and Identifying New Directions
                Building on their existing interdisciplinarity, librarians must develop the tools
                    and infrastructure necessary to support work in the multidisciplinary,
                    multimodal area of the digital humanities. This goal is served by interrogating
                    the tools and skill sets libraries and librarians need to have or cultivate in
                    order to support the digital humanities, particularly with regard to the ways in
                    which they can expand skills, services, spaces, and collections in order to
                    serve a diverse community of researchers, teachers, and students.
                Scholars working in the digital humanities at Stony Brook University and at many
                    other institutions are confronted with the problem that their institutions do
                    not have a centralized, supported center for digital humanities research and
                    pedagogy. Though this is arguably less problematic for established
                    practitioners, it can pose enormous challenges to students and to researchers
                    looking to embrace new digital humanities methodologies. At Stony Brook
                    University, individuals working with Geographical Information System (GIS)
                    technologies are supported by the university’s Geospatial Center, which offers
                    consultations, access to GIS tools, and graduate coursework. However, the
                    absence of a dedicated digital humanities center means that researchers working
                    with other modalities risk isolation and confusion. Stony Brook University
                    Libraries, like many research libraries, has sought to remedy this lacuna by
                    working to become a campus leader in the digital humanities and a connector of
                    diverse practices from across disciplines. In support of this goal, the
                    library’s Digital Humanities Working Group is a group of librarians from various
                    sectors of the organization who have interest and/or expertise in the digital
                    humanities: 
                        The Digital Humanities Working Group guides library
                            engagement in digital humanities work on campus, with an emphasis on the
                            ways in which the University Libraries can provide leadership and vision
                            in this dynamic area of inquiry. The Working Group plans programming,
                            offers a framework for research consultations, and works with liaisons
                            to engage with faculty and students on teaching, learning, and research
                            activities in the digital humanities.
                        
                    
                Working group members possess expertise in a variety of fields, such as
                    humanities, scholarly communication, library technology, web development, and
                    digital project creation. This interdisciplinarity contributes to the kinds of
                    services the group is capable of providing, while also creating a crucible in
                    which ideas about the Libraries’ role in the digital humanities are formed. By
                    engaging members of the library faculty from diverse areas of the organization,
                    the working group model problematizes the notion that the digital humanities
                    must exist as only one department of an academic library. Instead, this
                    inherently interdisciplinary, multimodal field of inquiry can be productively
                    situated at the crossroads of a variety of areas of librarianship. This kind of
                    flexibility also permits a reexamination of the digital humanities in the
                    library as it places it in dialogue with key library and information concepts
                    such as open access, information literacy, and scholarly communication. The
                    group’s inception in the fall of 2017 marks an important step in the library’s
                    journey as a digital humanities organization capable of providing leadership,
                    support, and enrichment to the campus community. However, it is also in many
                    ways the culmination of earlier efforts to build relationships with faculty and
                    students working in the digital humanities, and to use the Libraries’ status as
                    an interdisciplinary locus for scholarly communication as a platform for the
                    creation of a network of digital humanities practitioners at Stony Brook
                    University. This work began with a desire to understand the digital humanities
                    as they existed on campus, as well as to explore the potential role of the
                    library.
            

                Engagement Strategies: Putting Theory into Practice
                The liaison model which has characterized library outreach and academic
                    engagement for the past several years has important implications for extending
                    library work to the digital humanities. The liaison concept is predicated on the
                    idea that librarians will work with assigned departments or programs. However,
                    many libraries have extended this concept to a more functional model in which
                    librarians work with researchers, teachers, and students at key points
                    throughout their research, teaching, and learning process. These concepts
                    include emerging library competencies such as research data management,
                    bibliometrics, and the digital humanities 
                    . This presents a challenge to librarians related to
                    both expertise and visibility, namely, the need to communicate to their
                    constituencies the library’s potential as a resource in areas in which the
                    library has not, traditionally, played a strong role.
                Librarians at Stony Brook University and elsewhere have used diverse strategies
                    to engage with digital humanities scholars and to build community. For two years
                    librarians at Stony Brook University Libraries have hosted biannual Open Mic
                    events for digital humanities researchers, teachers, and students on campus.
                    Inspired by a desire to better serve digital humanists with existing projects,
                    these events were designed as a platform to connect scholars and students with
                    nascent projects to library-supported and open access resources, and to one
                    another. For the Libraries, each Open Mic was an opportunity to understand the
                    scope and practices of the digital humanities community at Stony Brook, and to
                    identify ways to make meaningful interventions.
                The Open Mic events were scheduled during daytime hours in the SBU Libraries
                    Center for Scholarly Communication, a flexible, presentation technology-equipped
                    space seating 28. The first Digital Humanities Open Mic event was held on March
                    5, 2016. In developing the event, the librarians organizing it began by reaching
                    out to Stony Brook University faculty known to be interested or engaged in
                    digital humanities activities and scholarship. The digital humanities at Stony
                    Brook University is a community without an institutional center, so identifying
                    likely event participants was an opportunity for the organizers to
                        sound the murky depths and map the rough shape and
                    range of the digital humanities at Stony Brook University, while discovering the
                    individuals situated in that space by interest, practice or scholarship. There
                    was a three-pronged call to participate or attend: Direct invitation to a
                    selection of known digital humanities researchers; an open invitation broadcast
                    to the myriad humanities departments and programs; and promotion, open
                    invitation on the library website.
                Five digital humanities researchers were identified and invited. Though none of
                    them were able to attend the event they all expressed interest in attending
                    future events. Two of them took the invitation as an opportunity to schedule
                    meetings with the event organizers and discuss library support for their work.
                    One discussion led to a collaboration between the researcher and the event
                    organizers and other librarians on a grant application for funding a digital
                    humanities project. The other discussion resulted in the development of a
                    course-integrated library workshop for the other researcher on digital
                    humanities resources and technologies.
                The open invitation included an online sign-up form for both attendance and
                    presentation. Three sign-ups were collected, one for attendance and two for
                    presentation. Those two presentations combined with three presentations from
                    librarians were the makings of an hour-long event. Though the event organizers
                    were uncertain of who would attend besides the participants and a small number
                    of librarians and library staff, they were confident that the open mic would
                    bring a spotlight to digital humanities and introduce to the SBU digital
                    humanities community the library as an active, engaged member.
                Though one of the scheduled presenters was a no-show, the other presentations
                    each went longer than 10 minutes and were further extended by discussion and
                    questions from the audience. In the end, three presentations (see Appendix 1)
                    were made and the event went slightly overtime. The presentations all included
                    demonstrations of ongoing projects using different technologies and offering
                    different features and experiences for students and researchers, and represented
                    diverse disciplines and wide-ranging materials and content. Considering the
                    diversity of the presentations and the different disciplines they represented,
                    the event was an effective introduction to the complex, interdisciplinary and
                    far-ranging qualities of digital humanities.
                The impact of the first Digital Humanities Open Mic can be assessed through a few
                    lenses, including the contacts made with the researchers who were unable to
                    attend but nevertheless welcomed the invitation as beginning of collaborations
                    with the library. Following the first successful open mic event, the University
                    Libraries organized a second event to appeal to scholars who may not have been
                    able to attend the first one, or whose work had progressed in the interim.
                    Several researchers working in the digital humanities had contacted the event
                    organizers, and the level of interest was sufficient to support the creation of
                    a second open mic event. Additionally, the notion of continuity was particularly
                    important as it emphasized the role of the Libraries as partner and consultant
                    in the work of digital humanities at Stony Brook University. The organizers
                    employed the same publicity strategies as for the first Open Mic, with the
                    advantage of nascent name recognition for the event among the digital humanities
                    community at Stony Brook University.
                The second Digital Humanities Open Mic event was held at Stony Brook University
                    on October 31, 2016. In marked contrast to the spring session, this Open Mic
                    attracted a number of participants who were new to the digital humanities, along
                    with a few who had active projects. One attendee brought the technical,
                    empirical perspective of a researcher trained in data visualization methods
                    outside of the context of the digital humanities. The diversity of this event
                    was unforeseen because, as with the first Open Mic, participants were not
                    universally screened or queried in advance. Prior to starting the Open Mic, the
                    authors spoke informally with several participants and got a sense of their
                    needs, interests, and motivations.
                It became readily apparent that the participants were interested in learning more
                    about the digital humanities through a general discussion, before turning to
                    project presentations. Moderated by the organizers, this conversation helped to
                    tease out the salient points of the digital humanities as a diverse group of
                    practices, inquiries, and research priorities .
                    Participants asked questions and demonstrated particular interest in the ways in
                    which digital projects and practices can inform more traditional modes of
                    research in the humanities and social sciences. This prelude was also an
                    opportunity to link the Open Mic to the work of other groups on campus, notably
                    the Stony Brook University Geospatial Center, which offers training in GIS
                    technologies.
                Following the group discussion, several scholars presented projects and
                    technologies as part of their work in digital humanities. This group combined
                    faculty librarians and graduate students, none of whom had presented at the
                    previous event. As had been the case the previous spring, the presentations
                    often exceeded the 10-minute lightning talk format. However, the template of a
                    presentation followed by discussion was altered to a more productive format, in
                    which attendees interacted with presenters to produce a joint presentation much
                    more conducive to feedback and enrichment. Because of the diversity of the
                    audience, presenters received feedback from a variety of perspectives concerning
                    new directions for their work. The informality of the open mic format permits
                    continual re-stagings and re-interpretations of these events in ways that can be
                    crafted to suit the needs of the digital humanities community at Stony Brook
                    University. This was particularly true of the second open mic event, which
                    relied less on presenter expertise and more closely followed the format of an
                    introduction to digital humanities priorities and methodologies.
                Building on the success of the first event, the second Digital Humanities Open
                    Mic increased the visibility of the University Libraries among digital
                    humanities researchers at Stony Brook University. Additionally, the second event
                    attracted much greater attendance from library faculty and staff, many of whom
                    were encountering the digital humanities as beginners. Though originally
                    conceived of as an outreach tool for non-library faculty, staff, and students,
                    the Open Mic events yielded the added benefit of raising the profile of the
                    digital humanities within the Stony Brook University Libraries as well.
                Informed by the experience of prior Digital Humanities Open Mic events at Stony
                    Brook University, the organizers elected to construct the third event in our
                    series following the same model as the first two. Rather than attempt to impose
                    a stricter format, we prefer to encourage open mic attendees and participants to
                    guide us in producing the event which is most useful to them. By understanding
                    that our researchers, teachers, and students work along a broad spectrum of
                    experience and comfort level with regard to the digital humanities, we equip
                    ourselves to better support them as they expand their research in this
                    field.
                The third Open Mic event was held on November 13, 2017. As with the previous
                    events, the third Open Mic was deliberately casual in order to foster discussion
                    and relaxed participation. Attendance was lower than the first two events,
                    however, the presence of an undergraduate was a welcomed development, and an
                    indication that interest in and curiosity about digital humanities is coalescing
                    around the Open Mic events. There was a stimulating balance of presentation and
                    engaged discussion that in some ways delivered on our original expectations when
                    developing the Open Mic events.
                Each Open Mic event has had its own distinct character, shaped in part by the
                    style, subject and content of the presentations, and perhaps even more by the
                    participation, questions and interests of the audience. The ultimate success of
                    each of these events can be measured in the subsequent requests for consultation
                    and instruction which demonstrate the fact that the Open Mic events raised the
                    visibility of the Libraries as a source of digital humanities expertise on
                    campus, and that they helped to condition the kinds of services and programs
                    offered to meet and expand current needs.
            

                Conclusion
                Why is the library uniquely situated to offer these services? The
                    interdisciplinarity of the library and the flexibility of its services, spaces,
                    and collections conditions its responsiveness to the needs of diverse
                    stakeholders within the digital humanities community. The library’s role in
                    teaching information literacy through instruction sessions, workshops, and
                    consultations dovetails with the need to communicate digital humanities
                    practices to students learning to incorporate them into their research process.
                    The library is uniquely suited to do this because it exists outside of the
                    student’s department in a way which allows it to support research and scholarly
                    inquiry removed from the constraints of disciplinary convention. Likewise, the
                    library’s flexibility regarding the communication of information — seen in
                    research guides, tutorials, videos, and more traditional forms of scholarship —
                    positions it well to work with students who are interested in disseminating
                    their scholarship through the multimodal methods offered by and through digital
                    humanities practices. Finally, by engaging students working in the digital
                    humanities, the library has an opportunity to serve its mission of contributing
                    to students’ intellectual and professional development in a way which is
                    consistent with its broader goal of promoting critical engagement with
                    information.
                Researchers benefit from the library’s digital humanities services and support
                    through access to collections curated in order to facilitate technological
                    engagement, as well as equipment and consultations intended to assist in the
                    integration of digital humanities practices into their scholarship and pedagogy.
                    This is an important opportunity for the library to engage with digital teaching
                    practices. Additionally, the library’s increasing participation in all aspects
                    of the research lifecycle positions it perfectly to help scholars to blend their
                    digital humanities work with their broader research project. Finally, the
                    library’s programming mission provides a forum for researchers to share their
                    work with an interdisciplinary community outside of departmental boundaries. 
                The creation of a robust menu of services, responsive collections, and flexible
                    spaces in support of the digital humanities is enriching for both the library
                    and librarians. The digital humanities provides an opportunity to conceptualize
                    library collections in innovative ways and to tailor library instruction and
                    consultations to this multifaceted field. As a component of librarian
                    professional development, digital humanities work encompasses several key
                    competencies, including digital practices and tools, collection strategy,
                    project management, academic engagement, and event planning. The diversity of
                    librarians’ training, academic backgrounds, and professional interests pair well
                    with the acquisition of digital humanities expertise, enriching the practice of
                    a fundamentally interdisciplinary, intersectional, and multimodal field of
                    scholarly inquiry. Resource-light, iterative programming, such as the Open Mic
                    events, allow the library to identify digital humanities practitioners and to
                    create a community of shared interest capable of serving the needs of students,
                    faculty, and librarians.
            

                Appendix 1
                Kasten, Kathleen; Chase, Darren; Costello, Laura; Haugh, Dana. Digital Humanities at Stony Brook University. Library
                    Subject & Research Guides, Stony Brook University Libraries. http://guides.library.stonybrook.edu/dh.

                
                    Open Mic 1 Presentations

                    Chase, Darren. Hello from the Children of Planet Earth:
                            The Voyager Interstellar Mission Golden Record. Digital
                        Humanities Open Mic, 5 March 2016. Center for Scholarly Communication, Stony
                        Brook University. http://scalar.usc.edu/works/hello-from-the-children-of-planet-earth/index.

                    Haugh, Dana. The John Milton Digital Library.
                        Digital Humanities Open Mic, 5 March 2016. Center for Scholarly
                        Communication, Stony Brook University. http://thechosenseed.weebly.com/.

                    Melgosa, Adrian and Sung-Gheel Jang, Natalia Chamorro, Jose Chueca. Latino Long Island: A Cultural and Social Map.
                        Digital Humanities Open Mic, 5 March 2016. Center for Scholarly
                        Communication, Stony Brook University. http://stonybrook.maps.arcgis.com/apps/MapSeries/index.html?appid=eed98716c97c4aa2b18fea18bc571273.
                


                
                    Open Mic 2 Presentations
                    Datema, Jay. Markdown for Interoperability.
                        Digital Humanities Open Mic, 31 October 2016. Center for Scholarly
                        Communication, Stony Brook University.

                    Kasten, Kathleen. Voyant Tools. Digital
                        Humanities Open Mic, 31 October 2016. Center for Scholarly Communication,
                        Stony Brook University.

                    Zukowski, Scott. Setauket’s Christian Avenue
                            Neighborhood (1873-1947). Digital Humanities Open Mic, 31
                        October 2016. Center for Scholarly Communication, Stony Brook University.
                            https://stonybrook.maps.arcgis.com/apps/MapSeries/index.html?appid=bd1407516a43483e97c854eea5319c3f.
                

                
                    Open Mic 3 Presentations
                    Chase, Darren.Introduction to Six
                                Degrees of Francis Bacon. Digital Humanities Open
                        Mic, 13 November 2017. Center for Scholarly Communication, Stony Brook
                        University. http://www.sixdegreesoffrancisbacon.com/.

                    Teplitsky, Joshua. Footprints: Jewish Books Through Time
                            and Place. Digital Humanities Open Mic, 13 November 2017. Center
                        for Scholarly Communication, Stony Brook University. https://footprints.ccnmtl.columbia.edu/.
                
            
