Title:  The Invisible Work of the Digital Humanities
                    Lab: Preparing Graduate Students for Emergent Intellectual and Professional
                    Work
Volume:  013
Issue:  2
Date:  01 August 2019
Abstract:  
                
                This article illuminates the ways that digital humanities labs might foster
                    experiences for graduate students that fulfill what Alexander Reid (2002)
                    postulates as the central task of the digital
                    humanities graduate education. We argue that while the digital humanities lab as
                    an institutional economic model does not necessarily promote a focus on graduate
                    student professionalization, it uniquely has the capacity to push back against
                    competing discourses of neoliberal vocationalism, funding and labor precarity on
                    one hand, and technological utopianism and tool fetishization on the other, to
                    train students agile, contextual, and rhetorical mindsets with which to enter
                    technologically-mediated workplaces and lives. To begin, we review the
                    discussion of digital humanities labs in the literature: digital humanities
                    institutional models, how these models are practiced, lab funding, and the
                    resultant position of labs as sites of training for graduate students. From
                    there, we offer a teaching case from the Lab’s fall 2015 “Stories from Data”
                    workshop in order to render visible a set of principles to guide
                    professionalization of graduate students in the digital humanities lab. We
                    conclude with reflections on how these principles might alter current
                    discussions of the success or failure of the Mellon Foundation and NEH ODH
                    digital humanities funding initiatives in the United States.
            
Full Body Text: 


                Introduction: The Visible Work of a DH Lab
                In The Big Humanities: Digital Humanities/Digital
                        Laboratories, Richard J. Lane discusses a number of types of humanistic labs, centres, projects, and products, but
                    he maintains a striking focus on the possibilities of the digital humanities
                    (DH) lab. For Lane, the digital humanities lab provides an opportunity to bring
                    a Big Science research model to the humanities, which includes a shift to lab-based knowledge production . Everything is larger: the research teams, the data sets, the duration of
                    projects, the funding — evolution, so to speak, of what we might call a lab ethos
                    . In addition, the construction of Big Humanities as a topic area correlates closely with a shift in
                    philanthropy in higher education, which is less concerned
                        about creating in-perpetuity funds than solving a large, intractable
                        problem
                    . DH funders such as the Mellon Foundation
                    will fund projects for impact, which is viewed as highly interdisciplinary, with
                    high levels of engagement, and market-consciousness .
                    The more scientific the model and technical the discourse, the more likely STEM
                    funding may also be available . For this reason,
                    Big Humanities are in great demand, and labs compete for large-scale funding
                    through the constructive and imagineering nature of their grants. Inevitably,
                    the paradigm of funding shapes the kind of work that is done, and the tools and
                    methods that are used.
                Of course this is not the only value that institutions see in digital humanities
                    labs. One need only inspect the technologies in a given DH lab to know what
                    kinds of projects in which the lab is participating or able to support. A large,
                    funded project will support the tools and methods needed to get the specific
                    work of that project done. There may even be development of specific packages or
                    software. By contrast, a lab that fits the computing support model will offer a
                    broader range of technologies, tools, and personnel to fit a broad range of DH
                    interests. An example of the former can be found in the humanities
                    college-funded Digital Environmental Humanities Lab at California State
                    University-Northridge, where students under the mentorship of one professor used
                    XMIND software to visualize data related to the creation of the national park
                    system in order to expose the exclusion of people of color in this narrative
                        . An example of the computing support model may be
                    found in the press release issued by Bowling Green State University to announce
                    their Digital Humanities Lab: 
                        The goal of the Digital Humanities
                                Lab is to encourage and support innovative, interdisciplinary
                                research projects that make creative use of technology, said
                            Colleen Boff, associate dean for University Libraries. We focus on supporting projects that are enhanced by
                                visualization tools, multimedia applications, and manipulating data
                                acquired through application programming interfaces
                            (API).
                        
                     The press release then lists the training offerings for faculty and
                    students related to the software that supports these kinds of projects. By
                    comparison, a Big Humanities lab, much like a Principal Investigator's (PI's)
                    scientific laboratory, may not necessarily have tools, methods, or training
                    offerings for a wider academic audience at their institution. The DH lab, then,
                    is fairly well-understood as a mechanism for advancing individual research
                    goals, supporting faculty enrichment, striving for institutional alignment with
                    scientific paradigms for enterprise-level research, as well as a hub for
                    postdoctoral and postgraduate training — even in institutions where it is
                    lacking.
                However, what do we see when we de-emphasize the institutional and faculty
                    aspirations so often associated with DH labs? The relationship between
                    institutional role and research activity operates amidst other dynamics of
                    research variation, and the DH lab is not uniform across it. As Mary Jo Deegan
                    notes, the literature in DH in the United States (she mentions specifically
                    Gold’s edited collections Debates in the Digital
                        Humanities) tends to be more focused on theory and more focused on
                    the Modern Languages Association and North America, whereas European DH tends to
                    be more project and practice-focused . The examples
                    of DH labs offered by Claire Warwick tend to be more focused on the practices of
                    large-scale projects . Postgraduate and postdoctoral
                    students tend to be situated as participants on these projects, who learn from
                    PIs on the job.
                In this article, we consider what invisible or less visible work becomes
                    illuminated when practitioners understand the DH lab as a space for prioritizing
                    graduate student needs. Graduate student perspectives may be sufficiently
                    overlooked in the debates of what,
                    why, and who is the digital
                    humanities, despite the importance of graduate students to most DH teams reliant
                    upon their labor. Thus, this article examines the ways that the DH lab can
                    foster unique experiences for graduate students that fulfill what Alexander Reid
                    postulates as the central task of DH — graduate
                    education . More specifically, we argue that the DH lab
                    as an institutional economic model does not necessarily promote a focus on
                    graduate student professionalization, but that it can and should have a profound
                    capacity to carve out space for deep thought in mixed-methods thinking, pushing
                    back against competing discourses of neoliberal vocationalism, funding and labor
                    precarity on one hand, and technological utopianism and tool fetishization on
                    the other. Thus, as a critical and technological space committed to practices
                    and capacities rather than a more exclusive emphasis on scholarly DH, the lab
                    can train students in agile, contextual, and rhetorical mindsets with which to
                    enter technologically-mediated workplaces and lives.
            

                DH Lab Models and the Treatment of Graduate Students
                It is difficult to discuss the DH lab in a vacuum from the forces that create,
                    shape, and reshape it over time. Here, we will review how the lab as a specific
                    form of DH institution comes into being, with specific focus on funding models
                    and projected inputs and outcomes from that funding. We will consider how the
                    practice of DH in the United States and outside of it may affect the composition
                    of labs and their graduate training. The graduate students who come to labor in
                    the lab are a visible and direct result of the synergistic forces of funding and
                    institutional shaping rather than consideration for the goals and objectives of
                    graduate education. Based on these considerations, we will take a look at how
                    various labs have approached graduate training and education as a part of that
                    institutional model. We then argue that much of that graduate training and
                    education is invisible because it is not tied to these funding models and
                    resultant lab practices.
            

                Training (graduate students) in the DH lab
                Training offerings in DH labs relate closely to the mission of the lab itself. As
                    with the Bowling Green example, a computing support lab model tends to support
                    general training offerings for the academic community related to particular types of software or specialist tools
                    provided by the lab itself . A Big Humanities lab,
                    on the other hand, might offer graduate students the opportunity to work as RAs
                    on a particular large scale sponsored research project, and be trained to
                    support that particular project. These are the two polar opposites, and there
                    can be a blending of these offerings, and other kinds of offerings as well.
                The DH lab offers a space for experiential learning that challenges a more
                    traditional classroom environment  in that it can be
                    the professionals employed by the lab — often designated as support staff or
                    unaffiliated with a traditional humanities discipline — that stand to offer the
                    most expertise for experiential digital research training for graduate students
                        . Yet this same condition raises several
                    questions regarding graduate student education: In the post-tenure university,
                    Who does and should train graduate students, and to what ends? Who are graduate
                    students to become (i.e., paid research assistants on Big Humanities projects,
                    researchers on their own projects, future faculty in disciplines,
                        alt-ac research professionals in higher education or
                    industry)? At an institution like Arizona State University, for example, that
                    has seen radical restructuring of its academic programs to as to create space
                    for fostering interdisciplinary work, how do future faculty become effectively
                    trained and usefully integrated into explicitly interdisciplinary spaces?
                    Finally, why might a Big Humanities-focused DH lab participate in graduate
                    student professionalization at all, if not incentivized under its funding model?
                    These questions, answered or not, do much to influence how the DH lab views its
                    mission in the university vis-à-vis its own disciplinary structure, and
                    furthermore raise additional questions about the value of promoting such work
                    and about the possibilities for the DH lab model. It is here where we begin our
                    discussion of our own graduate training experiment that sought to make the work
                    of graduate training visible in our DH lab.
            

                A Case Study: The Stories from Data
                    Workshop
                We consider the affordances and constraints from such a model by offering a
                    teaching case from our own Lab’s fall 2015 Stories from
                        Data workshop in order to render visible a set of principles to
                    guide professionalization of graduate students in the DH lab. The context for
                    this case study is the Nexus Lab at Arizona State University. During our time
                    employed at the Nexus Lab (as Director and Postdoctoral Fellow), it worked
                    largely within the Big Humanities model: teams sought out large-scale and
                    long-term funding; faculty partnerships for research spanned humanities and STEM
                    disciplines; and upper administration aligned the lab with other units at the
                    University invested in broad-reaching and big-impact work. However, part of the
                    mission of the lab was to operate in a Big Humanities space while at the same
                    time integrating technologies and lessons learned from that activity into
                    graduate student training.
                The Stories from Data workshop ran in the Fall Semester of 2015. The curriculum
                    spanned fifteen weeks, beginning in the second week of classes. Hosted in the
                    Lab, sessions took place from 1:00-3:00 p.m. on Friday afternoons. Attendance
                    was free and open to all university staff, students, and faculty. We did not
                    require consistent attendance in order to participate. We believe this
                    contributed to enormous initial interest, from which emerged a steady cohort of
                    staff, faculty, and students. The workshop began with seventy five participants,
                    and after steady attrition, concluded with a group of twelve who remained
                    consistent attendees and participants. Their backgrounds included rhetoric,
                    sustainability, industrial engineering, computer science, and literature.
                Stories from Data was an ongoing exercise in connecting participant expertise
                    with the process and tools for decision making with data. In many ways, we
                    sought to provide as much value as possible to participants by using the
                    workshop as a way of codifying into the recognizable skillset of
                        visualization the critical thinking, collaboration
                    skills, and mixed methods analysis that unfolds perpetually in the context of
                    interdisciplinary research. While the concept of
                        interdisciplinarity can seem esoteric and elusive, the
                    ideas of visualization and data
                        visualization have a more immediate appeal outside academia and
                    possess crosscutting benefits even within university research.
                Our framing principle for the workshop was People make
                        decisions based on stories from data, not the data alone. Our goals
                    for the workshop engaged the cognitive, cultural, design, and narrative
                    dimensions of visualization: 1) understand the tendencies and capabilities of
                    users; 2) produce visualizations that help us think, not merely present
                    information; and 3) learn how to tell a story from data that considers visual
                    and non-visual narrative parts.
                Generally each session fell into two parts, a presentation/discussion and a
                    hands-on exercise. Each session lasted two to three hours. Consistently, we
                    referred to the audience of visualizations as users rather
                    than viewers to foreground the idea that visuals are rarely
                    passively consumed.
                
                    Goal 1: Understand the tendencies and capabilities of users
                    The first weeks of the workshop consisted of discussing and exploring the
                        capabilities and limitations of visualization users. In this phase of the
                        workshop, we used ineffective visualizations as negative examples. We
                        solicited students to discuss the charts with the goal of understanding the
                        relationship between the data and visual elements, identifying the story
                        produced from the data, and producing recommendations for how to improve
                        each example. For instance, we discussed the world economy voronoi plot (see
                        Figure 1) as visually impressive, but hardly navigable visually. The
                        circular shape of the chart and the irregular shapes of the cells make it
                        difficult to understand the relationship between the data and the area
                        assigned to each country. The voronoi layout also makes the countries with
                        smaller economies crowded and illegible, possibly recreating the perception
                        perhaps the visualization was hoping to remedy. Participants also raised a
                        concern about the use of red and green colors together that would pose
                        accessibility concerns for colorblind users. The group wondered what a bar
                        chart or hierarchical chart might clarify about the data, as well as
                        discussed potential questions that could mobilize a revised visualization in
                        a story: is the goal to call attention to inequity? To power dynamics? To
                        correlations among large economies?
                    
                        An example of an ineffective visualization discussed in the workshop.
                            From howmuch.net
                        A visualization of the world's economy. The circular graph is
                            divided by country and is further divided by contribution of service,
                            industry, or agriculture.
                        
                    
                    Additionally, we drew from Jeff Johnson’s Designing with
                            the Mind in Mind (2010) to highlight perceptual and cognitive
                        limitations that humans face when apprehending visualizations. For example,
                        Johnson calls attention to the limitations of human abilities to recall
                        visual information, making it all the more important to facilitate
                        comparisons rather than recollections. Additionally, once users learn a
                        format and spatial layout, maintaining consistencies across multiple charts
                        — and multiple points in a story — can be seen as a technique for aiding
                        comprehension . Alongside these issues, we
                        discussed other sources of limitations in users, such as pre-existing
                        assumptions — understood as bias to some participants
                        and expanded upon as ideological, cultural, and linguistic contingencies by
                        others — and how a user’s prior conditioning can affect interpretation and
                        overall narrative.
                
                
                    Goal 2: Produce visualizations that help us think, not merely present
                        information
                    Drawing from Ben Fry’s Visualizing Data (2014),
                        the next phase of the workshop emphasized the planning and conceptualization
                        of a visualization as an opportunity to engage, understand, question, and
                        refine data. In this phase, participants spent time evaluating the data from
                        which visualizations were designed. This involved understanding the
                        structure of the data; namely, what constituted an object or series in the
                        data, and what dimensions of the data are available. Conversations about
                        data progressed to form questions about planning visualizations, and the
                        specific insights they mean to enable. In other words, before we can begin
                        visualizing, we have to decide the problem we are approaching.
                    Defining the problem, and evaluating that definition, is the key area where
                        we encourage the participants to apply their expertise. What data exists and
                        what visual roles it will play are necessary considerations. But what data
                        is missing, or the conceptualization of the problem itself required critical
                        thinking and reflection on participant expertise. During one session, we
                        presented the group with data and charts about the global production and
                        circulation of food from the International Center for Tropical Agriculture’s
                        2015 survey . In this exercise, there were
                        multiple spreadsheet files, each derived from both the survey and some
                        statistical analysis of the survey data. These files by themselves included
                        historical, geographical, agricultural, and economic data; the group had to
                        decide together what kinds of visual problem solving were allowed or
                        silenced by the state of the data.
                    
                        Participants in the Lab deliberate about the use of agricultural
                            survey data
                        A group of participants around a table in discussion about
                            representative limitations of the data.
                        
                    
                    The group consisted of participants with various expertise in rhetoric,
                        sustainability, industrial engineering, computer science, and literature. By
                        the end of the day’s session, the group did not ever reach the point of
                        sketching out or brainstorming possible visuals. Instead, they conducted a
                        lively discussion about the representative limitations of the data in its
                        current state (see Figure 2). A sustainability view challenged the
                        explanatory value of any visualizations that selectively presented
                        countries, while rhetorical considerations advised against presenting all
                        countries at once in a display that looked impressive but communicated
                        little. Additionally, some were reluctant to show spatial relationships
                        without also showing those relationships unfold over time. At stake in each
                        of these threads in the conversation is how to make a series of
                        representations (first data, then any visualization of that data) relevant
                        and responsible to the disciplinary values of their expertise.
                    By mid semester, then, the group engaged in practices that saw visualization
                        as a set of practices rather than a digital artifact or set of tools. Before
                        any ink or pixels, there must be a relevant and coherent sequence of
                        inquiries.
                
                
                    Goal 3: Learn how to tell a story from data that considers visual and
                        non-visual narrative parts
                    We used the concept of a story to invite participation
                        from multiple disciplines and points of view. The workshop had spent a good
                        deal of time and resources emphasizing visualization as a practice of
                        reasoning through a problem, and in the final phase of the semester we
                        circled back to the limitations and biases of visualization users that began
                        the semester. This time, however, rather than use the idea of bias as a way
                        to motivate our understanding of visualization design, we asked participants
                        to consider the cultural biases and prior assumptions of visualization
                        users. Each participant, as part of a final project, was responsible for
                        presenting a data visualization of their making that was part of a broader
                        narrative. The narrative would tell a story about a problem, relate that
                        problem to an audience, and punctuate that story with a visualization that
                        helped its users reason through data relevant to both the problem and the
                        story about the problem. For instance, in working through the global
                        agriculture data from earlier in the semester, one student produced a Sankey
                        diagram (see Figure 3) that diagrammed the total breakdown of global produce
                        by calorie type. In this story, understanding the contours of global
                        nutrition was the problem, and the student chose a small subset of the data
                        with only a handful of dimensions (by crop: total calories, carbohydrate
                        calories, protein calories, and fat calories). From the much larger dataset
                        about global calories and flows among countries and regions, the student was
                        able to tell a straightforward story about the kinds of plant-based calories
                        available globally. The final idea that non-carbohydrate calories are
                        scarcer is clear from the framing of the narrative, the selection of the
                        data, and the visual presentation of the data.
                    
                        Aggregate contributions of crops to global calories by calories (sic),
                            protein, and fat. Here Calories on the right side
                            erroneously titles carbohydrates. Produced with d3.js in 2015 by Stories
                            from Data student.
                        A Sankey diagram of global produce by calorie type. It shows a
                            variety of staple crops and what type of calorie they are (carbohydrate,
                            protein, or fat).
                        
                    
                    In the end, some participants excelled at programming, others at design, and
                        still others at the stories and rhetorical positioning of the analytical
                        narratives. No matter what the aptitude, discipline, and interests of the
                        participants, constructing the story from data became a
                        multi- disciplinary project where expertise could matter in a venue outside
                        that expertise. An English doctoral student’s perspective and craft was just
                        as important to crafting a story from data as a computer programmer or
                        graphic designer. The consistent training about visualization as a critical
                        thinking and communication exercise helped to connect humanities expertise
                        to applicable skills in visualization and data literacy. The idea of
                        thinking through what it means to have an argument seen by other groups
                        provided opportunities to articulate the value of individuals’ knowledge and
                        research. The practice of storytelling with data is experience relevant to
                        science, business, engineering, medicine, and more .
                
            

                Principles for Professionalizing Graduate Students in the DH Lab
                The Stories from Data workshop provides a teaching case to make visible what the
                    work of professionalizing graduate students might look like. This
                    work temporarily suspends the goals of sponsored research and academic
                    promotion. This work moves beyond the poles of teaching tools for machines and
                    software purchased for the DH lab as a support center and teaching tasks for
                    work on PI-driven Big Humanities projects. In fact, this professionalization
                    work rejects easy assimilation into any lab model. It is not a lab during this
                    kind of work, in the sense that specific instruments or a number of experts are
                    there, all working around a common problem or issue. Yet, a DH lab is precisely
                    the place where this professionalization work can take place, as a site of
                    experiential, cross-disciplinary, cross-rank, academic-industry
                    collaboration.
                Instead, we argue for centering graduate students and their development as
                    individuals, to prepare them for a wide variety of contingencies in their future
                    career paths. These principles do not invoke a particular set of skills, as the
                    tools and methods used in industry and in academia are just tools, not
                    development of the individual who may use them. As Goldman Sachs banking
                    director Matthew William Barrett said in an interview, I
                        used to joke that if you can find me someone who has a degree in figuring
                        out patterns of imagery in Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales, I can teach him to
                        break down a balance sheet in 30 minutes. What you want is a mind
                    . The set of principles behind the Stories from Data
                    workshop for graduate students do not derive from a particular digital skillset.
                        Tools are not the same as initiation into practice, or
                    experience with the principles of mixed methods work. This set of principles may
                    be applied to a variety of substantive areas.
                
                    Principle 1: A DH lab can foster cross-disciplinary conversation and
                        understanding
                    By nature and design, a DH lab can serve as a space of contact for graduate
                        students from the humanities and STEM disciplines who are approaching issues
                        of shared concern. It is in this way that the DH lab becomes a contact zone,
                        much as Mary Louise Pratt described as social spaces
                            where cultures meet, clash, and grapple with each other, often in
                            contexts of highly asymmetrical relations of power, such as colonialism,
                            slavery, or their aftermaths as they are lived out in many parts of the
                            world today
                        . The collision course of the humanities
                        and STEM in the same learning environment forces students to confront not
                        only the epistemological differences between the disciplines, but the way
                        the student’s own discipline circulates and is taken up (or not) across the
                        humanities-STEM divide, a divide fraught with competing value systems and
                        cultures. The students can see how they are heard across difference in the
                        academy, and be able to make better sense of their place in the wider world
                        outside of it with the training they have received in their discipline.
                    This involves, in part, understanding the benefits from being trained in a
                        particular discipline and working with others who are trained according to
                        different disciplinary ideals. Often, it is in collaborating across
                        difference — mixing methods or juxtaposing competing ideas within the same
                        discussion — that it becomes possible to break through a problem.
                        Unfortunately, interdisciplinary collaboration is rarely taught or trained
                        to academics, and as a result, grant-funded research projects across
                        disciplines can fall apart. As Bendix et al. notes, Thrown into strange company without preparation, ongoing guidance, or
                            long-term professional incentives, researchers fall back onto
                            disciplinary habits and raise disciplinary defenses
                        . The strange company of
                        those across disciplines must then be made familiar for interdisciplinary
                        collaboration to be successful.
                    This principle aligns with a concept suggested by Patricia Bizzell as she
                        argues how Pratt’s contact zone theory may be applied to graduate study.
                        Bizzell writes: 
                            It would also mean reorganizing graduate study [in
                                English] and professional scholarly work in ways I hardly dare to
                                suggest. I suppose that one would no longer become a specialist in
                                American literature, a Shakespeare man, or a
                                    compositionist. Rather, people’s areas of
                                focus would be determined by the kinds of rhetorical problems in
                                which they were interested.
                            
                         We are not suggesting altering a disciplinary program of study for
                        graduate students, but instead, that the DH lab has great potential to
                        enable the kind of work that Bizzell describes should order the focus of
                        graduate study. In fact, the DH lab model for extracurricular
                        cross-disciplinary inquiry has two benefits that altering the curriculum
                        does not. First, it alleviates the concern posed earlier about training
                        academics with a disciplinary identity. Here, we show that
                        cross-disciplinary work in the contact zone of the lab accentuates a
                        graduate student’s understanding of their discipline and how it travels.
                        Further, organizing a workshop like Stories from Data with the
                            rhetorical problem of how data is visualized and
                        used also fulfills the kind of large-scale problem solving that funders of
                        the labs themselves seek out. In this way, the DH lab alleviates concerns of
                        those anxious about interdisciplinarity while also doing exactly what
                        funders hope the DH will do.
                
                
                    Principle 2: A DH lab can offer experiences that enhance rhetorical,
                        critical, and contextual mindsets while simultaneously
                        building/making/hacking
                    It is neither new nor controversial to say that the DH lab has the capacity
                        for experiential learning. What is harder to abide is the work of combining
                        that experiential building/making/hacking with rhetorical, critical, and
                        contextual understanding of the very technologies we learn to
                        build/make/hack. As discussed earlier, the strictures of the semester system
                        and the traditional classroom render this work nearly impossible in the
                        curriculum. The workshop setting allowed those who wanted to invest the time
                        to do so. This allowed the workshop to spend its time in lengthy discussion
                        and then hands on exercises scaffolded to lead to the building of data
                        visualizations with several different tools and methods.
                    The development of rhetorical and critical mindsets, and a greater
                        understanding of the context of the tools we use, often coincided with
                        team-based experiences across disciplines. For example, when the
                        cross-disciplinary team tasked with creating a visualization from the
                        agricultural survey data could not agree on an interpretative approach to
                        the dataset, it revealed that it is much more complicated to collaborate
                        with a tool than to just use it alone. Several students from the course went
                        home to gain a greater proficiency with d3.js, but everyone in the workshop
                        gained a greater intercultural proficiency around the context of use of the
                        tool, a proficiency that will serve graduate students in all disciplines
                        well, wherever they may find themselves in career or life.
                    Rhetorical and critical mindsets are also developed through the exposure to
                        other disciplinary orientations towards technology. When humanities students
                        critiqued the racial or gendered characteristics of a data visualization,
                        students in STEM — not frequently exposed to cultural concerns — took
                        notice. The reverse also took place, where students in STEM readily noticed
                        that humanities students would be much more recalcitrant when it was time to
                        build, instead reading or talking through the hands on components of the
                        exercises. On the other hand, STEM students were much quicker to build
                        first, question later (or never), which humanities students also found
                        difficult to understand. However, over time, it helped each set to see how
                        certain practices and activities made certain disciplines more comfortable,
                        and how that might translate to the building of technologies and other
                        products and services in the workplace.
                
                
                    Principle 3: A DH lab can render visible systems of power that circulate
                        in their disciplines, in the academy, and in industry
                    By distancing the lab from both sponsored research and academic advancement
                        (meaning, the workshop was not geared toward either), we aimed to create a
                        workshop that was a space for graduate students to explore the material
                        conditions of their education and employment. Inevitably — and likely
                        because no one in the room was in a position of power over anyone else, as
                        the workshop was not-for-credit and lab professionals were not affiliated
                        with the disciplines or the tenure stream in the university — discussions
                        became as much about labor in and out of the academy as well as the tools
                        and methods for performing that labor.
                    Why do graduate students come to the DH lab? When graduate students arrived
                        in our lab, they voiced concerns. Worried about the academic job market,
                        about the kinds of work in industry they feel they may or may not be
                        prepared to do, and about the kinds of menial work they already had, as RAs
                        or as staff at the university. We are not alone, as Nowviskie writes about
                        The Scholars’ Lab at the University of Virginia: 
                            In the Scholars’ Lab, we work for the betterment of
                                the individual graduate students who come our way — conscious that
                                they are laboring within larger systems that are broken and that can
                                wound them. We want to broaden then their options and help them
                                build the technical and conceptual skills that will enable their
                                active engagement with the humanities well into its digital future.
                                We hope to render them more capable of constructing new systems and
                                of resisting inappropriate ones, from wherever they may
                                land.
                            
                         In this way, we agree with Nowviskie that
                            inappropriate systems exist not just in the
                        academy, but in industry and public life as well, and it is the work of
                        professionalizing graduate students to be able to recognize inequities and
                        injustices in their workplaces and in civic life, particularly as they
                        surround the making, circulation, and use of digital technologies.
                
            

                Conclusion
                In the last several years, several essays have been written about the state of
                    the DH initiative in the United States and its successes and challenges. In
                    2011, Alan Liu issued a report and a critique of DH. He asked, Are the digital humanities ready to live up to their
                        responsibility to represent the humanities and higher education as the
                        latter negotiates a new relation to postindustrial society?
                    . Liu’s critique stemmed from what he saw as a
                    divide between those who came out of humanities computing, who lacks almost all cultural-critical awareness and those
                    working from new media studies, who are indiscriminately
                        critical of society and global informational empire without
                        sufficient focus on the specifically institutional — in this case, higher
                        education — issues at stake
                    . Many other critiques of the Mellon
                    Foundation-funded American DH initiative have been raised in recent academic
                    trade publications, such as Brennan’s recent polemic The
                        Digital Humanities Bust in The Chronicle of
                        Higher Education
                    . These critiques range from upbraiding a system
                    that would fund particular types of scholarship perceived as lacking the rigor
                    of more conventional forms of critique, to the questioning of the value of
                    methods in DH for textual analysis .
                The workshop model and its set of principles for professionalization offer an
                    opportunity to visualize a DH that does a different kind of work than what is
                    often targeted in these criticisms. Much of the unrest and debate mentioned
                    above focuses almost exclusively on past or current PI-driven, sponsored
                    research projects in DH. What a workshop like Stories from Data makes visible is
                    how DH might inform a digital future populated with professionals who do
                    different kinds of work, in the academy, in industry, and in public life. The
                    graduate students we trained experienced a curriculum that was skill-oriented,
                    but anchored in a commitment to critical thinking and articulating their own
                    expertise to the skills at hand. As graduate students assessing their
                    professional trajectories and employment prospects, they experienced and
                    interrogated the political, economic, and cultural realities of working with
                    digital technologies, inside and outside of the humanities. They recognize the
                    changing face of the neoliberalized university as well as industry hiring
                    practices that largely reward experience with up-to-date technology tools devoid
                    of the context of use. And, by working as a place for student development, the
                    DH lab had given them opportunities to prepare for both.
                Indeed, a key value of this kind of training is that it connects ways of
                        thinking in addition to instilling a specific skill set.
                    The Stories from Data curriculum has since been taken up in multiple venues on
                    our campus across disciplines and participant groups. It formed the foundations
                    of a subsequent workshop, Decision Design for
                        Sustainability Approaches, produced in concert with the School of
                    Sustainability at Arizona State University. Additionally, the materials and
                    lessons from the workshop continue to inform and be refined by
                    interdisciplinary, data-driven research and leadership training among humanities
                    doctoral students, STEM students, active-duty military, and student-veterans at
                    the Library’s Unit for Data Science (co-author Simeone serves as current
                    Director).
                Finally, and perhaps most importantly, we hope to mentor graduate students who
                    can render visible to the public how the academy contributes to knowledge
                    production vis-à-vis technology. This is not a new argument; in fact, many
                    digital humanists on large-scale projects echo this call to improve the public’s
                    understanding of and engagement in DH projects. 
                    . Further, on the week of the submission of this
                    article, data scientist and author Cathy O’Neil wrote an op-ed for The New York Times titled The
                        Ivory Tower Can’t Keep Ignoring Tech. In this piece, she argues
                        We need academia to step up to fill in the gaps in our
                        collective understanding about the new role of technology in shaping our
                        lives...It’s absolutely within the abilities of academic research to study
                        such examples and to push against the most obvious statistical, ethical or
                        constitutional failures and dedicate serious intellectual energy to finding
                        solutions
                    . While controversial in several respects (including
                    her description of how data science is taught in higher education), O’Neil
                    points to exactly the issue Stories from Data is designed to combat — our
                    graduate students can identify and translate their role in exactly this work to
                    multiple stakeholders after they leave the lab, and in a way that communicates
                    their value as problem solvers in the issues of concern that O’Neil outlines
                    here. In the case of the lab, then, the impact on the issues of math
                        destruction and data and society is not measured in what is
                    formally studied and published by faculty with the help of graduate students,
                    but the subsequent conduct of participants in the world outside of academia or a
                    home department. This helps DH labs to envision the training of graduate
                    students toward careers in their own right, driven by their convictions and
                    talents rather than labs focusing on what faculty teach or research . As a way of engendering reflective technological
                    practice, the workshop space is designed to avoid replication of any model,
                    either industry-based or academic. No graduate student in Stories from Data is
                    pursuing a PhD in data science. Their work with data — and extracting knowledge
                    from data — is meant to enrich their understanding of storytelling and reasoning
                    with data. Crucially, that understanding includes critique, production, and
                    translation. While we hope that scholars based in universities continue to shed
                    light into the need for more deliberation and oversight when it comes to the
                    power that big data, artificial intelligence, and algorithms hold over the lives
                    of individuals. But it has been our mission that the graduate students we train
                    in the lab — who eventually become professionals and citizens in any number of
                    spaces — meaningfully intervene in those same systems as they continue to
                    challenge our ethics, values, and possible futures.
            
