Title:   War in Parliament: What a Digital Approach Can Add to the
                    Study of Parliamentary History 
Volume:  008
Issue:  1
Date:  1 April 2014
Abstract:  
                With the digitization of the parliamentary proceedings (Handelingen der Staten Generaal), the structuring of this body of
                    data, and the development of an advanced search engine, we can apply new methods
                    of historical research. This contributes to a further promotion of the
                    sophisticated use of quantitative data to enhance qualitative historical
                    research. This article focuses on the Boerenpartij(Farmers’ Party), the first political party from the
                    far right that entered Dutch parliament after the Second World War (WWII). The
                        Boerenpartij is remembered as being
                    stigmatized by the traditional political parties as wrong (
                        fout
                    ), as National Socialism and its supporters were dubbed in the Netherlands.
                    However, no systematic research has been conducted on the questions: in what
                    way, how frequently and for what purpose these connections with the
                        wrong past were made. With the available digitized data
                    and the retrieval techniques offered by computer scientists it is now possible
                    to answer these questions. 
            
Full Body Text: 
 War in Parliament: What a Digital Approach Can Add to the Study of Parliamentary
                History 

                Introduction
                 In early January 2012 Jan Baas died. Baas was a member of the Dutch Senate
                        (Eerste Kamer) for the conservative-liberal
                    VVD (People’s Party for Freedom and Democracy) from 1960 to 1981, and he gained
                    nationwide repute following a conflict with Hendrik Adams of the Boerenpartij. The argument became so heated that
                    blows were exchanged. In the Senate Baas had requested the floor for
                        personal business (een
                        persoonlijk feit), a special regulation in the Rules of Procedure
                    of the States General. Baas recounted his personal experiences with Adams during
                    the Second World War (WWII). The newly sworn-in senator Adams, said Baas, had
                    been his colleague at a state agricultural college during the war, where he had
                    been known as a supporter of the German occupier. During an argument about
                    Adams’ pro-Nazi conduct, Baas recounted, Adams had even threatened him with
                    deportation. Baas had contemplated at length whether he should stir up these
                    issues, which had occurred more than twenty years earlier:  Can it be justified to lay bare in public, during their lifetime, the past
                        of persons who were wrong, politically or otherwise?
                        After much hesitation I have answered this question affirmatively, if these
                        persons seek a position in the social order that, in terms of responsibility
                        and standing, they are, in my opinion, no longer entitled to. 
                            http://wip.politicalmashup.nl/
                                resolver/nl.proc.sgd.d.196619670000002?view=html&amp;q=Adams#nl.proc.sgd.d.1966196
                                70000002.1.7.3.
                        
                     This, in short, was more than personal vindictiveness. Baas felt that
                    Adams had not rehabilitated himself sufficiently to be an equal participant in
                    political decision making. See .
                
                
                    Boerenpartij leader Hendrik Koekoek has
                    systematically emphasized that the big parties tried to isolate him by referring
                    to the Boerenpartij as a kind of National
                    Socialist movement that was dominated by former Nazi-collaborators. Exposing
                    Adams in the Senate seemed to confirm this image. But was Koekoek right? Was his
                    party disqualified as wrong in Parliament and if so, how
                    was this done? In order to answer these questions we have used a new research
                    method that is possible because the Proceedings of the Dutch States General were
                    digitized some years ago, and the recently concluded project War In Parliament made systematic and advanced
                    searches possible (see paragraph: methodological innovation). War in
                        Parliament is a collaboration between the NIOD, the University of Amsterdam
                        (UvA) and DANS. The project was funded by CLARIN-NL. For the search engine
                        see: http://wip.politicalmashup.nl/search/ At the start of 2012 our
                        search engine covered only the parliamentary debates. Other documents
                        (Memorandums in reply, written parliamentary questions, etc.) were not yet
                        included. What is impossible by hand – finding every fragment in the
                    parliamentary debates that links the Boerenpartij and wrong – does become possible with a
                    digital approach. This article is intended to contribute to the benefits of
                    digital methods to historians by exploring the advantages of using an advanced
                    search engine that can search large quantities of data. However, before we go
                    into the methodology in more detail, we have to introduce the Boerenpartij in the historical and political setting
                    of the Netherlands in the 1950s and 1960s. 
            

                A Revolution from the Right
                 From the rise of Fascism in the 1920s in Italy to the Nazi-occupation of the
                    Netherlands (1940-1945), and then from the liberation up to the present day,
                    Dutch politicians have referred to the dangers of Fascism and Nazism. Referring
                    to Fascism and Nazism is still considered a tried-and-tested method to
                    stigmatize fellow-politicians and it could result in the effective exclusion of
                    parties. An extreme right-wing party like the CD (Centre Democrats), for
                        example, was marginalized in the 1980s by pointing out similarities with
                        fascist or Nazi parties. More recently, in a 2002 speech left-liberal
                        Democrats 66 (D66) politician Thom de Graaf mentioned Anne Frank to show
                        newcomer Pim Fortuijn in a bad light. References to Fascism and
                    Nazism were also used to call attention to social wrongs. Jaap Burger of
                        the PvdA (Dutch Labour Party), for example, spoke about racial policies
                        (Apartheid) in South Africa on 5 April 1960. Apartheid reminded him of ‘the
                        policy of racial inequality to which our people were exposed during the Nazi
                        occupation […]’. http://resolver.
                            politicalmashup.nl/nl.proc.sgd.d.195919600000246?view=html&amp;q=Burger%20AND%20Afrika
                            #nl.proc.sgd.d.195919600000246.1.12.3 ; On 25 August 1967, in a
                        debate on the Vietnam war, member of Parliament for the GVP (Protestant
                        Christian Political Union) P. Jongeling cautioned against falling back into the same mistake we made with Hitler.
                        According to Jongeling people had believed far too long that Hitler wouldn’t
                        be so bad. http://resolver.politicalmashup.nl/nl.proc.
                            sgd.d.19670000247?view=html&amp;q=Hitler#nl.proc.sgd.d.19670000247.4.54.6
                    
                
                 Our focus in this article is on the Boerenpartij, founded in 1958, that entered the House of
                    Representatives (Tweede Kamer) with three seats
                    in 1963. For the first time since the fleeting electoral gain of the CPN
                    (Communist Party Netherlands) in 1946 the traditional centre parties ARP
                    (Anti-Revolutionary Party), CHU (Christian-Historical Union), KVP (Catholic
                    People’s Party), PvdA (Labour Party) and the conservative-liberal VVD (People’s
                    Party for Freedom and Democracy) had lost a considerable number of seats, this
                    time to a right-wing newcomer to the political stage. Earlier (extreme)
                    right-wing attempts had failed prematurely. Especially when parties were
                    portrayed in the news as assembly points for former Nazi-collaborators their
                    fate was quickly decided.  For example, the National European Socialist
                        Movement (NESB) was banned in 1955 based on the argument that this party was
                        a continuation of the collaborating NSB (National Socialist Movement), and
                        the Netherlands Opposition Union (NOU) collapsed after the disappointing
                        1956 elections, where they took only 0.34% of the votes. http://www.nlverkiezingen.com/ TK1956.html
                    
                
                 Hendrik Koekoek had, before he entered the political stage as leader of the
                        Boerenpartij, been a candidate for one of
                    the earlier right wing political attempts (the National Opposition Union, NOU).
                    One of the pacesetters within the NOU was engineer S.D. Rispens, a former member
                    of the National Socialist Movement, founded in 1931 and the only legal party
                    during the war years because of its pro-Nazi attitude. Rispens was convicted
                    after the war and deprived of the right to vote or run for office until 1957.
                    Another candidate was the previously mentioned Hendrik Adams, also an engineer
                    and convicted of collaboration. After the NOU fiasco Rispens and Adams searched
                    for opportunities for a new party, this time with men without a
                        tainted past as figureheads.  The NOU had drawn
                        up a special list of representatives from, f.e., agricultural circles,
                        former political delinquents organizations, dissatisfied small businessmen
                        and repatriates from the former Dutch East Indies.  A man like
                    Koekoek was totally compatible with this picture.  Several documents in:
                            Rapport Rechtsradicalisme in de BRD, in: Stukken
                            betreffende de activiteiten van nationaal-socialistische,
                            neofascistische, carlistische en neo-nazistische groeperingen
                        , 1949-1968 NA 2.03.01, inv. nr. 457 [Report on Right-wing
                        Radicalism in the Federal Republic of Germany, in: Documents concerning the
                        activities of National Socialist, neofascist, Carlist and neo-Nazi groups,
                        1949-1968].  Koekoek, depicted in 1958 in a secret internal memo of
                    the Ministry of Agriculture as an a-political character who
                    was intellectually inferior to Adams and Rispens, 
                        Nota Ministerie van Landbouw Visserij
                        Memorandum Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, The Hague 12
                        February 1958 Re: extremist activities of farmers’ organizations, in:
                             Rapport Rechtsradicalisme in de BRD, in: Stukken
                            betreffende de activiteiten van nationaal-socialistische,
                            neofascistische, carlistische en neo-nazistische groeperingen
                        , 1949-1968 NA 2.03.01, inv. nr. 457. See extensively I. 
                     could not be linked to a wrong political past. He
                    managed to leave his mark on the Boerenpartij.
                    This success was partly due to the unrest in the Dutch agriculture sector, which
                    was caused by the state reforms towards economies of scale and modernization.
                    This unrest came to a head just before the parliamentary elections of 1963. 
                 In March 1963 an uprising broke out in a small village in the eastern province
                    of Drenthe, called Hollandscheveld. Three farmers, who had refused to pay their
                    contribution to the Agricultural board (het
                        Landbouwschap), were threatened with eviction from their farms.
                    The Agricultural board was a statutory industrial organization, established in
                    1954, a collaboration between the agricultural sector and the government to
                    reform agriculture and horticulture. The resulting taxes and regulations
                    generated resistance, especially among the small farmers. Whereas before these
                    so-called free farmers had been punished by imposing fines,
                    the Agricultural board switched to more draconian measures in 1963. The courts
                    sanctioned a decision to remove the three farmers and their families from their
                    farms. This resulted in fierce opposition. Led by Farmers’ Party leader Koekoek
                    hundreds of sympathizers gathered in Hollandscheveld. They were met by police
                    who greeted them with tear gas and truncheons. Television images reached many
                    Dutch households. This did little for the reputation of the Agricultural board
                    and it definitely benefited the Boerenpartij.
                        Information from history television programme Andere Tijden [Other
                        Times]. 
                            http://www.geschiedenis24.nl/andere-tijden/afleveringen/2007-2008/Hollandscheveld.html
                        
                    
                
                 Koekoek presented himself as the political outsider who voiced the feelings of
                    discontent of the average Dutch citizen. See 
                     Not only the small farmer could count on his support, as became clear
                    during the election campaign, but also others who were dissatisfied with the
                    political establishment and had right-wing sympathies. Koekoek’s political
                    agenda (against state bureaucracy, pro severe punishment of criminals and
                    against foreign fortune seekers) proved successful not only
                    in the countryside, but also in large cities. Predictions in the summer of 1966
                    said that in the case of new national elections the party could win as many as
                    twenty seats. 
                        
                     In the sixties this would have meant a revolution, and contrary to
                    popular opinion, not a revolution from the left. 
            

                 The Boerenpartij in the Spotlight 
                 Twenty seats would never be realized. In the States-Provincial elections of
                    March 1966 the Boerenpartij did win 6.4% of the
                    votes, a considerable number that stirred great upheaval. In the municipal
                    elections two months later the success continued and the Boerenpartij joined the councils of several large cities,
                    including Amsterdam and Rotterdam. The elections were regarded as heralds of
                    great success in the coming parliamentary elections. In the turbulent year 1966,
                    when the newly founded political party D’66 (Democrats ’66) also created a stir
                    on the left wing, the traditional political system seemed to falter. 
                 The Boerenpartij received a lot of media
                    attention. Mostly criticism came from the left, but the right side openly
                    expressed support. Also in academia the Boerenpartij became a hot topic. Academics concentrated on the
                    question of whether the ideas of the Boerenpartij were fascist or not. The sociologist A.T.J. Nooij
                    wrote a dissertation based on the F(ascism) scale
                    developed by Theodor W. Adorno. Nooij used interviews with supporters of the
                        Boerenpartij and an ingenious computational
                    model to deliver hard scientific evidence of whether the supporters of the
                        Boerenpartij were right-wing extremists and
                    whether they constituted a fascist peril. In the end Nooij did not quite
                    succeed; his problem was finding the right definition of Fascism. 
                        
                     Jaap van Donselaar, who published his book 
                        Fout na de oorlog
                     (Wrong after the war) years later, had the same problem. According to
                    him there was no doubt that the supporters of the Boerenpartij leaned towards fascist ideas, but whether the
                        Boerenpartij could be defined as fascist
                    remained difficult to determine. 
                         [Wrong after the war: fascist and racist
                        organizations in the Netherlands, 1950-1990] 
                
                 More recently historian Koen Vossen positioned the Boerenpartij in the changing political landscape of the 1960s. He
                    did not zoom in on the left, but rather on the right. According to Vossen the
                        Boerenpartij should be viewed as one of the
                    parties in the broader spectrum of right-wing
                        populist parties as it existed in the 1960s and that could, due to societal
                        changes, once again flourish.
                    
                         See also:
                     Vossen’s focus was not so much on the question of how
                        wrong the Boerenpartij
                    was; rather, he pointed out the depth of the impact of the Adams affair on the
                        Boerenpartij. Without this affair, Vossen
                    writes, the party might have won the predicted twenty seats in the elections.
                    But:  In the heated climate of 1966,
                        when the 1940-1945 traumas kicked up again, the Boerenpartij epitomized the presumed continued effect of the
                        fascist mentality, especially for progressive young people. In public
                        meetings of the Boerenpartij the presence
                        of young demonstrators who wanted to nip the fascist danger in the bud was
                        now almost standard. 
                     So Vossen attributes the beginning of the decline of the Boerenpartij to extraparliamentary actions. In this
                    article we take a look at the parliamentary side of the story by investigating
                        whether and if so in what way the Boerenpartij was linked with fascism and national
                    socialism (wrong) in the parliamentary debates. In this way we hope to
                    gain more insight into the degree to which the parliamentary discourse may have
                    contributed to the fall of the Boerenpartij.
                
            

                 Methological Innovation 
                 The National Library of the Netherlands (Koninklijke
                        Bibliotheek) in The Hague has digitized the Proceedings of the
                    States General. However, searching this huge database (approx. 2.5 million
                    pages) has its limitations because it does not allow certain complex queries.
                    With the search engine that was developed in the earlier mentioned War in
                    Parliament project this is now possible. 
                        http://wip.politicalmashup.nl/search/ 
                     In this project the parliamentary debates from 1930 through 1995 were
                    opened up, which means that text fragments can be harvested on the
                    document level (from a specific debate) as well as on the person level
                    (belonging to a specific speaker). 
                 To make this possible all debate transcripts were converted into semi-structured
                    XML documents. In these documents the debates are recorded in a hierarchy of
                    debate subjects (topics), consisting of a series of speakers (scenes), which in
                    turn are made up of speeches (chronological, starting with the main speaker and
                    followed by any interruptions and rebuttals). Every speech consists of
                    paragraphs. This structure of topics, scenes, speeches and paragraphs is
                    introduced by a computer-directed analysis of implicit information present in
                    the original documents, such as blank lines, standard formulations, headings and
                    typeface. In the older documents the topics are composed directly from speeches
                    (without the intermediate layer of scenes). Each fragment from the documents
                    generated in this way has its own unique identifier (up to the paragraph level),
                    which can be used to determine its position in the hierarchy as well as to
                    retrieve the fragment in question from the database. 
                 All speeches were subsequently annotated with information regarding the speaker,
                    political party, and role of the speaker. With the combination of speaker’s name
                    from the original document, date of session, and chamber (Senate - House of
                    Representatives) we managed to find in 98.5% of all speeches a unique speaker in
                    the politician database we constructed with data from www.parlement.com. Based on
                    biographical information a party name could then also be added. All data was
                    placed in an open-source database (eXist) with open-source search technology
                    (Lucene). This enables users to carry out searches on the fully indexed text.
                    Together with the hierarchical structure of the data we can search on the word
                    level and filter results on politician name, name of a party, speaker’s role,
                    date, Senate and House of Representatives, and make combinations. 
                 Capturing the historical information we were looking for was a challenge,
                    because references to WWII were imprecise and often hidden. To put it
                    differently, WWII was (and is) most of the time not a
                        natural topic in parliamentary debates, due to the fact
                    that WWII is part of the collective memory of Dutch society, thus references to
                    this period could be found in every debate. This is the reason why we
                    experimented with two different Boolean search strategies, instead of using more
                    complex classification methods (i.e. machine learning techniques) which proved
                    to be unsuccessful. 
                 The first broad search strategy consisted of formulating a number of search
                    queries that were linked. The goal of this strategy was to combine result sets
                    that would yield a single result set of relevant hits. We cast a wide net, so to
                    speak: all potentially relevant words as they could occur in the spoken text
                    when the subject was wrong were combined in the query:  fascis* OR NSB OR 
                            politiek delinquent
                         OR 
                            politieke delinquent
                         OR 
                            politieke delinquenten
                         OR collaborat* OR 
                            nationaal socialisme
                         OR 
                            nationaal socialistisch
                         OR 
                            nationaal socialistische
                         OR antisemitis* OR oorlo* OR Hitler OR
                        Mussert OR Roskam OR Boerenleider OR Jeugdstor* OR NSK* OR Waffen-S* OR
                        Landstand This yielded two result sets for the period 1963-1981 (the
                    entire parliamentary term of the Boerenpartij).
                    The first result set contained all references to wrong by the speakers of
                    the Boerenpartij and yielded 178 hits. The
                    second result set contained all references to wrong of all other parties
                    and yielded 7662 hits. It should be mentioned that there can be more than one
                    hit in a debate (topic) or even in a speaker (scene), because each of the
                    queries mentioned above is harvested at the speech level. Also important
                    to mention is that during the writing of this article (July/August 2012) it is
                    not yet possible to reproduce the query via the publicly accessible web
                    interface of the search engine. This is due to a limit on the use of the
                        wildcard (*) that is necessary at present to avoid server overload, a
                    technical obstacle that will be remedied in the near future. 
                 A second widely cast net led to a result set of all references to the Boerenpartij by others than Boerenpartij members: 
                        Boerenpartij OR Adams OR Koekoek OR Voogd OR Brake OR Harmsen OR Harselaar
                        OR Bossche OR Koning OR Kronenburg OR Leffertstra OR Nuijens OR
                        Verlaan This query resulted in 12,204 hits. 
                 The combination of both queries wrong and 
                        Boerenpartij
                     excluding the Boerenpartij (which we
                    already had with 178 hits) yielded 179 hits. 
                 The set of 179 hits we subsequently examined for relevance. This was necessary
                    because search terms like oorlo* (war), for example, did not result in
                    relevant fragments (war yes, but not the Second World War). Noise was not
                    restricted to war-related search terms. 
                 The search for persons (the members of the Boerenpartij) also generated noise. In a query a distinction must
                    be made between searching for persons who have said something, and searching for
                    persons who are mentioned. The first is relatively easy. As the structure of
                    parliamentary reports has remained fairly consistent through the years, it was
                    possible - despite the necessary OCR (optical character recognition) errors - to
                    detect the announcement of speakers in nearly every case, and identify the
                    speaker by matching speaker name and party name with a database of politicians
                    with precise session days and party memberships. In this way a distinction can
                    be made between the Christian-Democrat politician Jan de Koning, the liberal
                    H.E. Koning, and J. de Koning of the Boerenpartij. In the second case, in which the search is for
                    persons mentioned in the spoken text this is not yet possible, because such
                    identification will depend on the context of what is said. A search query on
                        Koning will yield many non-relevant results. The search engine is not
                    able to distinguish between the three Konings solely on the basis of the
                    text. 
                 Noise is a major obstacle in this study, partly as a result of the Boolean
                    search method. What was impossible during the term of the project due to the
                    one-year time limit, i.e. limiting the noise, is still an ambition for the
                    future. This could be done for example, through more advanced search techniques,
                    such as using statistical language models on the content of the debate text in
                    order to make a classification of speeches that do or do not address a specific
                    topic. Another way of addressing this problem could be clustering speeches based
                    on the relevance of words within a speech with regard to a specific topic, where
                    different algorithms are available to calculate this relevance. However,
                    this is not off-the-shelf technology and requires more time to implement. 
                 However, even that would not solve the problems. Qualitative analysis of the
                    results will still remain a prerequisite to finding an answer to the question if
                    and especially how the Boerenpartij was linked with wrong, as we will explain
                    below in the analysis of the results. It is the context that determines the
                    relevance of a reference. Concretely, and this is essential, this means that
                    every hit must be examined, making the (too) extensive result sets (thousands of
                    hits) too labour intensive. 
                 Knowledge of historical details on the subject also proved necessary. The search
                    term Holocaust, for example, does not yield results before 1978, because
                    this name for the murder of the Jews only became established after the American
                    docudrama series Holocaust. This does not mean,
                    however, that the persecution of the Jews was not discussed before 1978. A term
                    like political delinquent, on the other hand, was used mainly in the
                    period 1945-1955 and slowly vanished over the following years to be replaced
                    with words like ex-national-socialist or even war criminal.
                
                 After our first search strategy and the assessment of the hits on the
                    combination of the queries wrong and 
                        Boerenpartij,
                     the question emerged whether we had now found all relevant hits. To check
                    this we employed a second search strategy. It consisted of a series of specific
                    queries that were continually adapted and compared: 
                
                     List of the specific search queries 
                    
                        Search query
                        Period
                        Speaker
                        Party
                        Hits
                    
                    
                        boerenpa* AND fascis*
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        [not defined]
                        17
                    
                    
                        fascis*
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        [not defined]
                        18
                    
                    
                        boerenpa* AND nationaalsocia*
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        [not defined]
                        0
                    
                    
                        boerenpa* AND nazi*
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        [not defined]
                        8
                    
                    
                        boerenpa* AND nazi* NOT fascis*
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        [not defined]
                        5
                    
                    
                        boerenpa* AND NSB
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        [not defined]
                        4
                    
                    
                        boerenpa* AND NSB NOT fascis*
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        [not defined]
                        2
                    
                    
                        boerenpa* AND NSB NOT nazi*
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        [not defined]
                        3
                    
                    
                        boerenpa* AND NSB NOT nazi* NOT fascis*
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        [not defined]
                        1
                    
                    
                        Koekoek AND fascis*
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        [not defined]
                        14
                    
                    
                        Koekoek AND fascis* NOT boerenpa*
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        [not defined]
                        8
                    
                    
                        Koekoek AND nazi* NOT fascis* NOT boerenpa*
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        [not defined]
                        6
                    
                    
                        Koekoek AND NSB NOT nazi* NOT fascis* NOT boerenpa*
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        [not defined]
                        5
                    
                    
                        NSB OR nazi* OR fascis*
                        1958-1982
                        Koekoek
                        [not defined]
                        18
                    
                    
                        fascis* OR nazi*
                        1958-1982
                        Adams
                        [not defined]
                        0
                    
                    
                        Adams
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        [not defined]
                        96
                    
                    
                        adams AND oorlog
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        [not defined]
                        11
                    
                    
                        boerenpa* AND fout
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        [not defined]
                        34
                    
                    
                        collaborat*
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        [not defined]
                        69
                    
                    
                        collaborat*
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        Boerenpartij
                        1
                    
                    
                        antisemitis*
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        [not defined]
                        107
                    
                    
                        antisemitis*
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        Boerenpartij
                        3
                    
                    
                        antisemitis* AND boerenpar*
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        [not defined]
                        3
                    
                    
                        boerenpar* AND wereldoorlog
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        [not defined]
                        15
                    
                    
                        Koekoek AND wereldoorlog
                        1958-1982
                        [not defined]
                        [not defined]
                        9
                    
                
                 Combined query-search is very slow, because the search engine is under
                    construction. Therefore, we decided to leave out the links in this table. It is
                    possible, however, to check our findings by entering the keywords into the
                    search engine. 
                 This method of searching and comparing results eventually produced twenty
                    relevant hits, with a clear peak in 1966, the year of the Adams affaire, with
                    eight hits. As the query was small every time, it was easy to experiment, which
                    resulted in interesting and not directly sought results. References to
                        Fascism for example, came from the communist CPN side a
                    disproportional number of times: of the 499 references to Fascism between 1958
                    and 1982, 177 were made by the CPN, meaning that this small party was
                    responsible for a third of the total number. The Boerenpartij referred to Fascism 18 times. Not once did the
                        Boerenpartij refer to national
                        socialism in the relevant period and only 3 of the 208 times was
                        anti-Semitism mentioned by the Boerenpartij.
                
                 Both the specific and the broad search strategy finally resulted in the same
                    (relevant) hits and can therefore be considered (reasonably) reliable; however,
                    it should be mentioned that 100% completeness (recall) cannot be guaranteed. The
                    search engine indexes the source documents on the word level, and errors can
                    occur due to the earlier mentioned OCR errors, unknown spelling variations, and
                    ambiguity due to wrongly interpreted punctuation marks and hyphens. One example
                    is the comparison that senator Algra from the Anti Revolutionary Party (ARP)
                    made on 25 May 1965 between NSB and Boerenpartij. The search engine missed this hit in both
                    strategies because in the text NSB was followed by a comma instead of a full
                    stop (N.S.B,). 
                 The fact that we found this debate anyway underscores that results by search
                    engines retrieved from scans of historical documents to some degree remain more
                    unreliable even after the most careful OCR corrections than born digital
                    documents. Scanned documents are as unique as their originals: one small
                    compositor error, a small layout change, is copied on the scan and is not always
                    detectable even with the latest of techniques and best corrections. Unlike the
                    current digital Parliamentary reports, which are much easier to read for search
                    engines, any piece of paper that was scanned by the Koninklijke Bibliotheek has its own uniqueness, as does anything
                    that was preserved in the pre-digital era. This is important when the
                    possibilities and impossibilities of digital historical research are at issue:
                    if a relatively standardized corpus like the Proceedings is accompanied by so
                    much uncertainty, then digitized archives will present an even
                    larger challenge. 
            

                 Parliamentary Mores 
                 What did the result sets yield with regard to content? The first link between
                        wrong and the Boerenpartij in the
                    Proceedings was 19 November 1963, during the approval of the budget of the
                    Ministry of the Interior. Koekoek complained that the Dutch Secret Service (BVD)
                    had listened in on him and that a letter had been stolen. He presented himself
                    as a victim of the establishment that discredited him as a right-wing extremist. 
                        
                            http://resolver.politicalmashup.nl/nl.proc.sgd.d.196319640000692?view=html&amp;q=nl.
                            m.00717NSB%20OR%20nazi%2A%20OR%20fascis%2A#nl.proc.sgd.d.196319640000692.4.84.1
                        
                    
                
                 Koekoek did not present clear evidence, but was indirect and not very concrete.
                    This resulted in an awkward debate between him and the conservative-liberal
                    Minister of the Interior Edzo Toxopeus, in which Toxopeus rejected Koekoek’s
                    allegations as vague and insinuating. For Koekoek, however, the issue was that
                    he was made out to be wrong and a danger to the state. J.H.
                    Scheps, a World War Two resistance fighter and a heavyweight within the labour
                    party, intervened by pointing out that nobody thought Koekoek was
                        wrong, but that Koekoek did have to back up his
                    allegations with evidence. Otherwise, according to Scheps,  We will return to the atmosphere we knew in the years when the N.S.B.
                        started and when all manner of forces weakened the essential value of
                        parliament. All those individuals who are reputed to stand up for the people
                        at that time proved what it means when the powers of parliament are
                        weakened. 
                            
                                http://resolver.politicalmashup.nl/nl.proc.sgd.d.196319640000692?view=html&amp;q=nl.
                                m.00717NSB%20OR%20nazi%2A%20OR%20fascis%2A#nl.proc.sgd.d.196319640000692.4.84.1
                            
                        
                     Here the connection with wrong consisted of a referral to a
                    mentality and procedure that were wrong, not to
                        wrong political positions or ideologies. This
                    observation clearly underlines the importance of qualitative analysis. In
                    Scheps’ eyes the Boerenpartij acted
                        wrong rather than was wrong.
                
                 In May 1965 anti-revolutionary representative H. Algra, also a former resistance
                    fighter, tried a slightly different tack in the Senate. He compared the success
                    of the Boerenpartij to the success of the NSB
                    in the 1930s, a consequence of feelings of distrust and dissatisfaction with
                    government policies among part of the electorate. Algra hastened to say that
                    this obviously was not enough reason to put both parties on a par, but felt a
                    warning was in order. 
                        
                    
                
                 Marcus Bakker, leader of the communist party (CPN), went a little further during
                    the Budget Debate on 12 October 1965. In his opinion the government elicited
                    fascist thinking from the Boerenpartij with its
                    policies, thereby stimulating political instability. 
                        
                            http://resolver.politicalmashup.nl/nl.proc.sgd.d.196519660000794?view=html&amp;q=
                            Koekoek%20AND%20liquidatie%2A#nl.proc.sgd.d.196519660000794.2.22.35
                        
                     Koekoek replied the next day that the Boerenpartij had nothing to do with Fascism:  Mr Bakker brought it up. Now let him prove – he has every opportunity to
                        do so – that we have anything to do with the N.S.B., and that we have
                        anything to do with fascism. I can sit back and wait confidently, because I
                        can declare in advance, that we do not. Regardless of how well he can speak
                        his piece, he will certainly not be able to get out of this one, even if he
                        has an hour to do so. 
                            
                                http://resolver.politicalmashup.nl/nl.proc.sgd.d.196519660000795?view=html&amp;q=
                                Koekoek%20AND%20N.S.B.#nl.proc.sgd.d.196519660000795.5.22 
                        
                     The remarkable dynamics of accusing and demanding evidence, that would
                    prove characteristic of the debates regarding Koekoek and his party, started to
                    take shape. 
                 Up to that point attacks on the Boerenpartij in
                    the debates had focused on its unparliamentary conduct and rabble-rousing that
                    was reminiscent of the NSB. But the Adams affair that started after the 1966
                    summer recess was of a different nature: here a Boerenpartij senator’s national socialist past was exposed. This
                    was no longer about NSB-like methods but about a former collaborator who thought
                    he could return to the political arena without reflection on his war past. 
                 Without an advanced search engine we could also have found the debates regarding
                    Adams. What we would not have discovered, however, is that the Adams affair was
                    a (once-only) break with the way in which members of parliament had treated the
                        Boerenpartij so far. Only this affair was
                    literally about wrong
                    Boerenpartij-politicians and the key question
                    was on what conditions a former political delinquent was allowed to participate
                    in national politics again. All other references (before and after) were
                    insinuations about the political conduct of the members of the Boerenpartij that leans towards or plays into the
                    hand of Fascism. 
                 In fact, our project is a clear example of a combination between a quantitative
                    (give me all references to x) and qualitative (what does x mean by close
                    reading) approach. 
            

                 Fascist Farmers 
                 The State-Provincial elections on 20 September 1966 resulted in the installation
                    and swearing in of the new members of the Senate. Immediately following this
                    official ceremony VVD-senator Baas was given the floor on personal
                        business. It stood to reason, Baas argued,  that we would welcome the members of [the Boerenpartij] and treat them like our new
                        colleagues. 
                    
                        
                            http://wip.politicalmashup.nl/resolver/nl.proc.sgd.d.196619670000002?view=html&amp;q=
                            Adams#nl.proc.sgd.d.196619670000002.1.7.3 
                     However, the war past of one of them made this impossible. This person
                    was Hendrik Adams, whom Baas had met in his position as teacher at a state
                    agricultural college. In class, Baas said, Adams had systematically propounded his ideas on the importance of
                    collaborating with the occupier. In 1944 the situation escalated and Adams had
                    threatened Baas with the words: I, Adams, will
                        make sure you are deported as soon as possible. These words echoed
                    in his mind for many years, Baas said: More
                        than 20 years later our paths cross again. You will understand, Mr
                        President, that I am not able to be amicable towards Mr Adams
                    
                        
                            http://wip.politicalmashup.nl/resolver/nl.proc.sgd.d.196619670000002?view=html&amp;q=
                            Adams#nl.proc.sgd.d.196619670000002.1.7.3 
                    
                
                 The truth was out: Baas could not accept Adams as a colleague; the rift caused
                    during the war was not yet mended. According to Baas, Adams had in no way
                    expressed regret for his wrong attitude during the war.
                        If I believed, said Baas, that Mr Adams understands why he was convicted and
                        lost the right to vote, and that he had come to the realization that he was
                        wrong, then I might have been able to forgive him.
                    
                        
                            http://wip.politicalmashup.nl/resolver/nl.proc.sgd.d.196619670000002?view=html&amp;q=
                            Adams#nl.proc.sgd.d.196619670000002.1.7.3 
                    
                
                 The bomb exploded after the Senate session ended. Boiling with anger [Adams] entered the coffee room of the
                    Senate, Baas later explained, and
                        stormed towards me. You miserable oaf… he shouted, among other
                        things. And then I thumped him.
                    
                        http://portalettes.vpro.nl/ artikelen/36963665/
                     The scuffle, which was widely reported in the newspapers, shows the
                    emotion of the renewed confrontation between people who had been each other’s
                    enemies during the occupation years under a very different balance of power. At
                    moments like these the question of conditions for renewed forms of living
                    together between former right and
                        wrong citizens became urgent. 
                 On 4 October Adams was given the opportunity to defend himself, and was
                    unsuccessful. Adams evaded the accusations, believed that there was a conspiracy
                    against the Boerenpartij, and refused to
                    apologize for his pro-Nazi behaviour during WWII. 
                 For Baas a demonstration of regret was a necessary precondition to be able to
                    accept a former collaborator as a colleague in parliament. During the
                        personal business speaking time Adams had been given
                    the opportunity to do this: distance himself from his wrong
                    past and show that he had reformed. As he had not, Baas felt the former political delinquent Adams lacked
                        every personal right to be a member of this
                        Senate:  For other political parties
                        too things would have been different had Adams admitted that he was
                            wrong during the war. 
                
                Instead, Adams emerged from the debate as an incorrigible national socialist
                    collaborator and cowardly traitor, as well as an anti-Semite [during the war he
                    wrote for an anti-Semitic magazine] of the worst kind. In fact, Adams’ political
                    death sentence was already signed. On 25 October 1966, in the Senate, Adams’
                    letter of resignation was read:  The unworthy and above all unlawful treatment, which I have been forced to
                        endure during the previous two sessions, in a hostile atmosphere from all
                        Dutch political parties and under your & – not very authoritative &
                        – leadership, is unacceptable to any honest Dutchman and it is only on the
                        basis of this consideration that I hereby inform you of my withdrawal as
                        officially elected representative of the Boerenpartij in this Senate. 
                            
                                http://resolver.politicalmashup.nl/nl.proc.sgd.d.196619670000004?view=html&amp;
                                q=adams#nl.proc.sgd.d.196619670000004.1.5 
                        
                    
                
                 The Senate took note of Adams’ missive. Although the turmoil continued outside
                    parliament for some time and schisms led the Boerenpartij into hot political waters, there were very few
                    references to Adams in either the Senate or the House of Representatives. 
                        After Adams’ missive there are only a few relevant references. IJmkers (CPN)
                        touched on it briefly in December 1966: 
                            http://resolver.politicalmashup.nl/nl.proc.sgd.d.196619670000009?view=html&amp;q=
                            boerenpa%2A%20AND%20fascis%2A#nl.proc.sgd.d.196619670000009.2.4 
                     The dividing lines were drawn clearly: former collaborators who did not
                    publicly renounce their war past were not accepted in the highest political
                    bodies. And, as shown by the motion of no-confidence against Koekoek,
                    politicians who did not appreciate this could count on severe disapproval. Did
                    Adams’ retreat also mean the end of the connection that was made between the
                        Boerenpartij and wrong? It’s time to
                    draw some conclusions. 
                 First of all, up to the Adams affair in the autumn of 1966 the Boerenpartij was not associated in Parliament with a
                    fascist ideology, but was merely accused of a
                        wrong mentality; the conduct of Koekoek and associates
                    allegedly showed the non-acceptance of parliamentary mores and rules, which was
                    reminiscent of the undemocratic conduct of the NSB in the 1930s. 
                 Secondly, the Adams affair meant a rift in the political discourse about the
                        Boerenpartij. An alleged
                        wrong mentality was no longer the issue. The affair
                    demonstrated a totally different aspect of the link between wrong and
                        Boerenpartij: the discussions about Adams
                    showed the unwritten conditions that former collaborators had to meet in order
                    to be allowed back into political decision making. Adams was unable to stand his
                    ground because he would not renounce his past. In fact, he made it clear he did
                    not regard his war past as wrong. The fact that Koekoek
                    stood by him and attempted to expose politicians in other parties as
                        wrong, almost resulted in political suicide. 
                 The third conclusion is that after 1966 hardly any links were made in Parliament
                    between the Boerenpartij and wrong. This
                    begs the question whether the rejection of Adams also served another purpose,
                    namely to render the Boerenpartij harmless.
                    Disqualifying political opponents with a reference to the Second World War was
                    (and is) an effective means to do so. Based on our findings we may state that
                    the association with a wrong mentality by itself had little
                    political effect. The Boerenpartij continued to
                    grow in the period between 1963-1966. However, when a concrete person was
                    convincingly exposed as wrong and the party did not
                    unambiguously distance itself from this individual, electoral success
                    evaporated. 
                 As the first two conclusions are the result of interpretation of the gained
                    results (close reading), the third – no links between the Boerenpartij and wrong – couldn’t have been drawn without
                    a digital approach, and is promising for further historical research. More
                    research would benefit our understanding of political transition periods and the
                    relationship between electoral success of newcomers to the political scene and
                    the attempts of the old parties to disqualify their
                    intentions. 
            

                 Lessons Learned 
                 Unfortunately, digitized sources are generally used in much the same way as the
                    originals. The advantage of digitization is then limited to easy access (no more
                    trips to the university library) and to finding what you are looking for (a
                    particular debate or speaker) more quickly. The state-of-the-art search engine
                    that was developed in the War in Parliament project enabled the combination of
                    several search queries in order to systematically check if, and if so, in what
                    way the Boerenpartij was linked to wrong
                    in the parliamentary debate. In other words, in this project we did more than
                    just speed up our research by formalizing our research question. During this
                    process the War in Parliament pilot project has
                    taught us some valuable lessons. 
                 The first lesson concerns the nature of the information that one looks for in
                    the context of studying references to WWII in general, and in this particular
                    case the relationship between the Boerenpartij
                    and wrong. With the exception of debates that explicitly concern WWII
                    (debates about the release of war criminals, pensions for war victims etc.).
                    WWII tends to be a very implicit topic in the parliamentary
                    debates. References are often made in passing and some are very hard to capture.
                    This is one of the reasons why machine-learning techniques with which we
                    experimented (see above) failed. The second lesson was that the relevant phrases
                    are time-specific (Holocaust, political delinquents) and semantically ambiguous.
                    To give just one example of semantic ambiguity: 
                        bezetting
                     (occupation) in the sense of the German occupation of the Netherlands
                    between 1940 and 1945 also harvested references to the occupation of
                    departments, hospital beds etc. So, the need for close reading remains a
                    prerequisite to gaining the relevant results.  For efforts made to find
                        solutions on semantic ambiguity, see for example the work of Dutch linguist
                        Piek Vossen: Attila Göring en Piek Vossen,
                        Computer assisted semantic annotation in the
                            DutchSemCor project
                        http://hnk.ffzg.hr/bibl/ lrec2010/pdf/269_Paper.pdf, date
                        accessed 10 November 2013. 
                
                 The big challenge is therefore how to improve retrieval performance. In a
                    proposal we submitted to the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research
                    this year, and in which the digital approach is crucial to harvesting our
                    results, we build explicitly on the experiences gained in War in Parliament. 
                        Mobilising emotions in parliament. The Second World War
                            as a benchmark of political morality in post-war political discourse in
                            the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, and the Federal Republic of
                            Germany, research proposal submitted to NWO Free Competion, May
                        2013. The reviewers were unanimous in judging the propsal as very
                        good/excellent. NWO will take the decision for funding in December 2013.
                     In this proposal, and in addition to the current state-of-the-art
                    Boolean query suggestions, we plan to add three key extensions aimed at
                    improving the suggestions and thereby the retrieval system’s effectiveness. One
                    way is to include synonym structure, either user-contributed, corpus-generated
                    or extracted from a dictionary or back-of-the-book-indexes (e.g. knowledge based
                    enrichment). The second addition is semantic in nature; from experiments
                    involving media studies researchers, we know that semantically informed search
                    suggestions (based e.g., on people, organizations and locations) are key to
                    exploratory searches in digital humanities. We aim to integrate such suggestions
                    within the proposed Boolean query suggestion environment. 
                        
                     We will visualize such semantic suggestions in term clouds to analyze
                    them. Finally, the third addition, is to make Boolean query suggestions
                    time-aware. 
                        
                     References to WWII were, as reported above, not only implicit in many
                    cases, they were also subject to trends (changes in vocabulary). Terms that make
                    good query suggestions during one period may not be very effective during
                    another. The insights gained in time-awareness will be integrated into the query
                    suggestion process through a combination of time series analysis (of term
                    frequencies) and co-occurrence analysis. With these improvements, we hope we’ve
                    found a solution for the main problems experienced in the War in Parliament
                    project. 
                 This is the more important, because WWII has been the most powerful benchmark of
                    political morality in post-war Western societies, and political elites were (and
                    still are) in permanent need to relate to the defining experiences of warfare,
                    political oppression and genocide. An interdisciplinary approach will provide us
                    with models for a better understanding of that past. Extensive usage and further
                    development of existing text-mining tools will enable us to address questions
                    about political transition periods (in this article a new right-wing party
                    entering the political stage) and whether or not there is a relationship between
                    the utilization of WWII as a political argument and these transitions. A digital
                    approach, as we have seen, facilitates the analysis of large text corpora over
                    long time periods. 
                 We want to conclude this article with a remark on the conditions
                    which are needed to conduct digital historical research. This is all the more
                    important because it is a much neglected subject, not only in the scholarly
                    literature but also by technical utopianists who push for a revolution in the
                    humanities. The Dutch Academy for Sciences (KNAW), for instance, launched an
                    innovative programme for the humanities that primarily focuses on tools. In this
                    journal, the Swedish scholar Patrick Svensson, who can hardly be accused of
                    scepticism towards digital innovations, wrote in 2012: ‘While the ideas of grand challenges and big humanities
                        certainly have attraction and require forward thinking in order to identify
                        complex problems and large-scale visions, we should be careful not to
                        uncritically accept the frame of big humanities, which, for instance, has a
                        tendency to be coupled with a positivist agenda and a homogenization of the
                        humanities.’
                    
                        
                    
                
                 Besides the danger of homogenization of the humanities, which means here the
                    desire to emphasize on quantitative criteria in the humanities and thus to
                    squeeze out the qualitative (and therefore less measurable) ones, we need to
                    realize that digital source material is a prerequisite to apply text-mining
                    techniques. This may sound like we are stating the obvious, but we are not; in
                    practice much of the material is still in analogue form, and can therefore not
                    be searched using text-mining techniques. At NIOD, for example, less than three
                    percent of the total archival material has been digitized. If the large-scale
                    version of the methodological innovation is to be successful, mass digitization
                    of paper collections is inevitable. This step is in danger of being skipped
                    because there is so much focus on the more sexy development
                    of tools. 
                 Furthermore, much archival material is in formats that either cannot be
                    transcribed at all as text [e.g. graphical material] or which has only been
                    digitized as a page image but has not been transcribed as text [e.g. page images
                    of manuscript materials or documents that for various reasons cannot be
                    processed with OCR]. This means that digitization of this material can help us
                    retrieve certain information more easily, but it will remain necessary to
                    analyse results by hand at a rather low level. But given these challenges, the
                    success of methodological innovation first and foremost depends on digitization
                    of paper collection for which there is often no money or no will (or both).
                    However, if this isn’t done, only a small number of historians will get involved
                    in the much needed discussions on the improvement of digital techniques to
                    conduct historical research. 
            
