Title:  Sequential Rhetoric: Using Freire and Quintilian to Teach
                    Students to Read and Create Comics 
Volume:  009
Issue:  4
Date:  23 December 2015
Abstract:  
                
                Our comic combines visual literacy, progymnasmata, and critical pedagogy to
                    showcase a classroom study that used comics production to teach visual literacy.
                    The comic first looks at comics criticism, visual rhetoric, and comics
                    scholarship to set a base to build a methodology build in critical pedagogy and
                    ancient rhetoric. Critical pedagogy’s tradition of inviting students to find
                    meaning in the origin of ideas fits in with having students design and study a
                    medium that’s often overlooked during their college experience. Such an approach
                    echoes Freire’s ideas of using critical strategies as an effective model for
                    change. Progymnasmata, and Quintilian’s work in general, allows students to
                    approach the new medium of comics through reading and production through an
                    ancient rhetorical practice that relies on a step-by-step process. Looking at
                    Quintilian's pedagogy, we demonstrate a modern classroom study that uses
                    progymnasmata to make the strange familiar while introducing visuality. The
                    actual study is briefly discussed as well. This amalgamation of ancient
                    rhetoric, comics studies, and critical pedagogy is the basis of the research
                    behind this pieces’ goal of exploring comics as a multimodal means of
                    composition. 
            
Full Body Text: 

                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
                
                    
                
            

                Creator's Statements

                

                We decided to present our argument through an omniscient narrator that mimics the
                    tone and moves of the academic genre’s tones and invisible (and partially
                    objective) narrator. This means that instead of relying on a traditional avatar
                    like most comics do, it relies on academic writing and technical instruction
                    techniques (like Jody Culkin, Mitch Altman, Andie Nordgren, and Jeff Keyzer have
                    done), where the narrator occasionally shows up, but primarily lets the findings
                    and arguments do the work. That said, the teacher that bookends the story serves
                    in many ways as the narrator as do some of the characters. 
                Ideally, our comic would have been done by an artist, someone like Jeff Lemire,
                    Emily Carroll, Alex Ross, Scott McCloud, Richard McGuire, Seth, Kate Beaton,
                    Vitaly S. Alexius, Hope Larson, Gabriel Rodriguez, or any other talented artist.
                    However that defeats the purpose of our argument: that students and instructors
                    can engage in the comics medium and gain from its affordances. This is why the
                    art relies on a simple style based in examples of the medium, but done with
                    inadequate art training. However, this isn’t a weakness; instead it embodies the
                    call of the paper to get students and scholars to write visually no matter the
                    skill level involved. 
                
                    Original Contribution of Work
                    The goal of many contemporary compositionists, rhetoricians, and
                        professional/technical communication scholars is to incorporate multimodal
                        elements and visual rhetoric into the classroom. Research in this area, as
                        well as the desire to use multimodal texts, is nothing new or unique, but
                        the practice itself has been adopted slowly. Many reasons for this exist:
                        courses are already brimming over with content, competing mediums don’t
                        carry sufficient academic weight, and accessibility concerns abound. These
                        are legitimate critiques; multimodality is complex and taxes an already
                        crowded composition and technical communication field. Yet, a simple form of
                        multimodality already exists and has legitimate research to support it —
                        comics. Comics is a medium capable of handling many genres and incorporating
                        comics as a form of multimodality in research, composition, rhetoric, and
                        professional communication is a practice that is simple. Since publishing in
                        comics is usually not at option, in order to justify the analysis and
                        creation of comics in the classroom — and in turn, academia — one can turn
                        to established practices, in particular, critical pedagogy and the ancient
                        rhetoric practice of progymnasmata. 
                
                
                    Comic Studies
                    Comics in academia isn’t a new idea either, though it’s usually limited to
                        being the subject of rhetorical analysis in published articles or as a
                        catalyst for analysis in the classroom. If it’s used as a means for
                        composing or creation, it’s primarily for reflective and autobiographical
                        writing. These approaches are helpful and important, but comics can be used
                        in other academic formats, including peer-reviewed research. Comics use
                        rhetorical skills to teach important lessons and students can compose with
                        comics to create arguments and instructional texts. In the process of
                        composing with comics, students learn visual rhetoric and effectively
                        realize multimodal writing. This isn’t the end though. Teaching students to
                        compose with comics is the first step toward arguing that comics can be a
                        means of publishing research in addition to the traditional essay.
                    Comics studies is a steadily growing trend in academia across multiple
                        disciplines. The medium was once considered merely pulp-art or a children’s
                        genre (and in some audiences still is), but many scholars (both in popular
                        culture and in academia) have worked for years to show its potential and
                        depth. Research has already been done proving comics’ usefulness in the
                        classroom (from elementary to higher education) as a medium to teach from
                        and to analyze. Although many have argued for comics’ positive influence,
                        and there are comics that have been accepted as textbooks and readers (see
                        McCloud; Losh, Alexander, Cannon; Gonick; etc.), the majority of instructors
                        and scholars are either unaware such a movement exists, indifferent to the
                        movement, or unconvinced it’s legitimate.
                
                
                    Important and Academic-esque Comics
                    Usually titles like Maus, Persepolis, or any of McCloud’s non-fiction work come to mind
                        when serious comics are mentioned. These are a great start, but they are
                        only the surface of many more works that deserve further exploration. The
                        non-fiction genres that stray from memoir and lie on the margins of academic
                        scholarship are a great place to start. These pieces include Colon and
                        Jacobson’s 9/11 pieces (the first a graphic adaptation of the 9/11
                        commission report and the second a history of the wars that followed), the
                        journalism cartoon movement (including Sacco’s books), McCloud’s Chrome
                        instructions (and earlier work), Paul Buhle’s editorial work on multiple
                        academic-themed comics — including historical texts like Zinn’s adapted
                            People’s History — biographies, history
                        tomes, technical communication done in comics format (like Eisner’s work and
                        other instructional comics), post-modern philosophical debates like in
                            Logicomix, and the textbook Understanding Comics done in comics form (see
                        Losh, Alexander, Cannon). This is the line where entertainment and
                        scholarship blur, which are explored in the justification in our piece.
                
                
                    Comics, Progymnasmata, and Multimodality
                    Although the overall goal is to see the acceptance of comics as a means to
                        publish research findings (not to replace the essay format, but to be a
                        companion when appropriate), this piece focuses on the initial steps —
                        teaching the idea to students as a goal to teach visual rhetoric and
                        multimodality. This piece looks at a method of teaching that draws on
                        critical pedagogy, analyzes comics that read like scholarship, and has
                        students compose in that format. Critical pedagogy’s tradition of inviting
                        students to challenge the authority and looking below the surface level to
                        see where meaning lies fits in with the idea of having students compose in
                        and study a medium that’s often overlooked during their college experience.
                        Such an approach echoes Freire’s ideas of using critical strategies as an
                        effective model for change. He writes, the teacher presents the material to the students
                            for their consideration, an re-considers her earlier considerations as
                            the students express their own
                        ). In order for an acceptance of new
                        media and mediums to occur, it’s often necessary to engage students in the
                        process of discovering. Empirical evidence based on students’ experiences
                        can provide valuable evidence to support the bigger goal of having the
                        larger academic community accept such a medium as a way to compose
                        arguments. 
                    Progymnasmata, and Quintilian’s work in general, make up another significant
                        section of our piece. Combining ancient rhetorical pedagogical practices
                        with comics studies hasn’t been explored. In addition, this piece draws on
                        critical pedagogy concepts of otherness and oppression, in this case making
                        a literal observation of the inherently other medium of comics
                        compared to the safer essay and textual pieces. This amalgamation of ancient
                        rhetoric, comics studies, and critical pedagogy is the basis of the research
                        behind this pieces’ goal of exploring comics as a multimodal means of
                        composition.
                

                
                
                
            
