Title:  Locating Grid Technologies: Performativity, Place, Space: Challenging the
               Institutionalized Spaces of e-Science
Volume:  003
Issue:  4
Date:  20 March 2010
Abstract:  
            This paper arises out of a brief period in the early- to mid-2000s when the British
               funding and research climate facilitated a relationship between the technical,
               operational language of e-Science and the creative and performing arts. It concerns
               the ways in which live creative practices produce media traces that are fractured
               across screens and networks to produce new spatial relations between live events and
               their records. The split and contradictory subjectivities produced in these highly
               mediatized environments bring to the fore creative tensions between the live event
               and the recorded document. That is, the discourses, technologies and practices (if we
               may separate these) of e-Science not only produce new, spatial connections between
               events and their archives, they enact the liveness of archives as they are
               accessed and recombined to produce new art forms. Locating Grid Technologies:
               Performativity, Place, Space, a research workshop series funded by the A&H
               e-Science Initiative in its 2006 round, aimed to investigate how e-Science
               technologies might inform new understandings of space and time for distributed,
               creative research practices. Arts and technology researchers from the UK, US and
               Japan met to generate, analyze and re-use audio-visual documents of distributed
               practice-led research. Specifically, the project sought to combine and repurpose
               e-Science tools in order to investigate the spatial relationships produced between
               time-based, live events and their immediately mediatized traces. This paper
               investigates those performative fragmentations of place and space. It suggests that
               the potentialities and pitfalls of e-Science tools and technologies present fertile
               material for the arts researcher, particularly within the area of practice-based
               research: from the politics of surveillance to the aesthetics of video compression,
               from the ethics of multidisciplinary collaboration to the theoretical implications of
               mixing video time and space with the time and space of the performance event.
         
Full Body Text: 
Locating Grid Technologies: Performativity, Place, Space: Challenging the
            Institutionalized Spaces of e-Science

            Introduction
            
               
               A sidewalk curb.
            
            I am interested in human remains: in the residues, artifacts and traces left after
               the party is over, in the kinds of things that people produce when they gather
               together. And I am interested in how those remains might be rearranged on some
               occasion to create even more littering. I am an archaeologist of sorts, but one who
               looks at the relationship between performance and documentary forms. More precisely,
               I track the transformations that occur across media, bodies and space as performances
               are documented and as documents are incorporated into other art practices and as
               those practices are subsequently documented and so on, in myriad permutations and
               combinations. That is, I am interested in where the spaces and times of events are
               transformed into the spaces and times of their representations in video.
            
               
               A curving road with grass alongside it.
            
            This paper arises out of a brief period in the early- to mid-2000s when the British
               funding and research climate facilitated a relationship between the technical,
               operational language of e-Science and the creative and performing arts. Although the
               creative and performing arts have always been at the leading edges of technological
               innovation, the formalization and funding of e-Science presented arts researchers
               with new opportunities to engage and extend their relationships with new
               technologies. However, where new media arts have emphasized the critical-creative
               transformations afforded by technologies, e-Science has largely been articulated in
               operational and technological terms, providing practical, secure, networked tools to
               enable (science) research. Thus, the UK’s Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC)
               defined e-Science as 
                  a specific set of advanced technologies
                     for Internet resource-sharing and collaboration
                  
               . Certainly, as evidenced elsewhere in this volume, e-Science has presented
               exciting opportunities for researchers across the arts and humanities to unlock the
               potential of archives and existing data sets.
            However, what are the implications for other forms of research, in particular,
               practice-as-research, where questions of knowledge production are of a different
               order? Specifically, how might e-Science offer new ways of complicating key issues in
               the performing arts? Where might e-Science, as traditionally understood, facilitate
               data access, visualization and use? Within a performing and creative arts context,
               e-Science tools not only present new opportunities to develop arts practices, but
               they also produce traces and artifacts that may be combined to produce new work. This
               paper concerns the ways in which live creative practices produce media traces that
               are fractured across screens and networks to produce new spatial relations between
               live events and their records. The split and contradictory subjectivities  produced in these highly mediatized environments bring to
               the fore creative tensions between the live event and the recorded document . That is, the discourses, technologies and practices (if
               we may separate these) of e-Science not only produce new, spatial connections between
               events and their archives, they enact the liveness of archives as they are
               accessed and recombined to produce new art forms. Where conventional telematic
               performance perhaps privileges a focus on the production of a 
                  third space
                  
                in which mediatized, distributed arts practice coheres as event, the
               emphasis in e-Science on maintaining the integrity of myriad data sets refuses such
               coherence. Within an e-Science context, practice-as-research is simultaneously an
               event and a series of traces – from flattened dialogue maps to video data.
            
               
               A computer screen projected on a wall with two people standing before it and
                  several seated people facing it.
            
            
               Performativity, Place, Space, a research workshop series
               funded by the AHRC e-Science Initiative in its 2006 round, aimed to investigate how
               e-Science technologies might inform new understandings of space and time for
               distributed, creative research practices. Arts and technology researchers from the
               UK, US and Japan met to generate, analyze and re-use audio-visual documents of
               distributed practice-led research. Specifically, the project sought to combine and
               repurpose e-Science tools in order to investigate the spatial relationships produced
               between time-based, live events and their immediately mediatized traces. This paper
               aims to address questions concerning those performative fragmentations of place and
               space. To do so, it will review the current state of e-Science in the arts and
               humanities, while revisiting the achievements and outcomes of the 2006 workshops in
               order to assess the potential of e-Science to track, understand and visualize
               transformations of performance from the live event through to its documentation,
               retrieval and reuse in other live events. This paper does not, therefore, focus on
               distributed performance per se, but rather on the 
                  affordances
                  
                that e-Science brings to arts research activities. Additionally, this paper,
               and the others in this volume, may simply mark a brief period in the history of
               funded arts research in the UK when information and communications technologies were
               seen to present exciting opportunities to produce new ways of thinking research
               practice. The e-Dance project,
               based at University of Bedford and representing a collaboration between Manchester,
               Leeds, Open University and Bedford, is now the UK’s sole major funded e-Science
               project that focuses on the performing arts. The collaborators developed the key
               ideas introduced at the Bristol workshops in conjunction with their individual,
               pre-existing research activities.
         

            e-Science Background
            Rather than emphasizing the provision of high performance computing to researchers —
               with some notable exceptions (see Terras
                  article in this issue) — the UK e-Science agenda has focused on large-scale,
               distributed collaborative research enabled through the Internet. It aims to
               facilitate flexible, secure and coordinated resource sharing to produce new research
               and has been expressed in terms of producing a network of computing power acting as a
               single, extensible computer. The investment of some £230 million
               
                  http://web.archive.org/web/20080530213136/http://www.epsrc.ac.uk/PressReleases/DeliveringeScience.htm,
                  accessed 05.03.2007 in UK e-Science was driven by an increasingly
               globalized research market that sees researchers faced daily with geographically
               distributed tasks that involve analysis, access to resources, interdisciplinary
               collaboration and project management. The common characteristics of e-Science are
               coordinated problem solving via distributed computing; networked resource sharing;
               virtual organizations; and transparent, efficient pervasiveness. This vision is given
               form via three principle grid architectures: computational, data and communications
               grids.
            Computational grids allow for distributed processing power. An example of a
               computational grid might be the Condor-G multicore
                  network, developed by the University of Wisconsin-Madison. It harnesses
               unused processing power while people are not using their computers, similar in spirit
               to the well-known SETI program, which searches for extraterrestrial intelligence via
               at least three million user desktops.
                  http://www.seti.org/site/pp.asp?c=ktJ2J9MMIsE&b=178025, accessed
                  03.03.2007 Computational grids automate, rationalize and democratize
               procedures across national borders and institutional infrastructures. In a sense,
               they comprise a globalized production network, geared towards recent changes within
               an academic sector increasingly competing with private-sector interests for both
               funding and posts.
            Data grids are distributed file systems and federated databases organized in secure
               networks. In order to manage these file systems, a dizzying array of storage
                  resource managers are in development, from the open-standards Storage Resource Management
               collaboration to the proprietary Storage Resource Broker
               (SRB), which is a logical distributed file system based on a client-server
               architecture that presents the user with a single global namespace or file hierarchy.
               It provides secure access, via a uniform API, to various types of data storage across
               local and wide-area networks, and maintains metadata (data about the data) about each
               stored object (files).
                  http://www.sdsc.edu/srb/index.php/FAQ#What_does_the_SRB_do.3F, accessed
                  05.03.2007 Where a computational grid is, in effect, a system of
               production, data grids hold out the promise of seamless, globalized procurement.
            Finally, the communications grid encompasses both open source (such as Access Grid) and
               proprietary (such as the Chicago-based IOCOM, formerly InSORS, Grid) solutions for distributed communication and
               collaboration. Both Access Grid and IOCOM assemble resources including multimedia
               large-format displays, presentation and interactive environments, and interfaces to
               Grid middleware and to visualization environments. They are flexible, interactive
               audio-visual networking environments that deliver high-quality, multiple video stream
               and sound across IP networks to support group-to-group interactions across the Grid.
               They differ significantly from ISDN-based video-conferencing and telematic
               performance platforms in that they enable highly expandable, uni- and multicast
               meetings among many locations. More than facilitating face-to-face meetings or mixing
               audio-visual signals the communications grid is intended to be a computational
               environment, which allows the recording and reuse of meetings. If I continue to
               follow the logic of the industrial metaphor, communications grids facilitate the
               delivery of produced and procured data for specific purposes. By creating a
               globalized network that facilitates efficient production, storage and retrieval the
               e-Science agenda has aimed to position UK research teams at the forefront of the
                  knowledge economy.
            
         

            e-Science in the Screen and Performing Arts
            The neo-liberal flavour of e-Science as a means to open up new research
                  markets thus differs significantly from the political utopian visions of
               the electronic arts and new media communities. Where e-Science has focused on funding
               infrastructure to facilitate prospective new research, the new media arts communities
               are project- and problem-oriented. In other words, while e-Science has been seen as a
               solution in search of a problem, new media arts may be characterized in terms of
               creative problems that work towards solution. Where both communities may share tools
               and technologies, the differing production contexts are important. The UK’s e-Science
               Core Programme was very clearly aimed at placing UK researchers at the top of the
               global research market. Making research visible and available is seen to be a good
                  thing in itself. For the arts and humanities researcher, however, production
               contexts and funding infrastructures are at the heart of how we engage critically and
               creatively with such questions as technicity, presence, play and so on. Technologies
               are never transparent tools for producing knowledge. The material and coded
               constraints of any tool are what make data and shape understanding .
            2005 saw the launch of the UK’s AHRC e-Science research
                  strand. One of the early activities initiated through the AHRC was the e-Science Scoping Study
               (May-August 2006). Principle Investigator Sheila Anderson spearheaded the creation of
               an Arts and Humanities e-Science Support
                  Centre and organized a series of Experts Seminars, to which key
               researchers in each subject domain were invited to discuss the opportunities and
               challenges that e-Science presented in their fields of research. The aim was to
               identify strategic areas for further development and funding by research councils.
               Through the Scoping Study process e-Science in the arts and humanities communities
               was defined as 
                  the development and deployment of a
                     networked infrastructure and culture through which resources — be they
                     processing power, data, expertise, or person power — can be shared in a secure
                     environment, in which new forms of collaboration can emerge, and new and
                     advanced methodologies explored.
                  
                While it may be straightforward to measure and express the benefits of, for
               example, large-scale, biomedical visualization projects, practice-led research in the
               creative, performing and screen arts is not always goal-orientated in this way. The
               Scoping Study’s definition was, therefore, particularly welcome in that it was
               sensitive to the need for arts and humanities research to frame itself in not wholly
               instrumentalist ways. In order to engage with e-Science and produce new research,
               careful attention needs to be paid to the kinds of data that we want to analyze,
               process, deliver and — more interestingly — create. E-Science in the performing and
               screen arts is challenging precisely because creative research does not map directly
               onto dominant research models in the sciences. These communities do not often face
               problems that require new tools. Instead, our work operates in the other direction:
               new tools and technologies inspire questions that we address through creative
               research praxes. With its emphasis on infrastructure, e-Science can provide the
               materials with which the screen and performing arts can generate research questions
               useful in both disciplinary areas.
            There are endless gazetteers and critical studies of new media arts. A comprehensive
               discussion of new media arts is well beyond the scope of this paper. Moreover,
               e-Science has developed quite separately from the wider arena of new media arts.
               Nonetheless, the background to the arts and technologies context is useful in framing
               the potential relationships that might be forged with e-Science. The investigation of
               relationships among science, technology and the arts has been well established since
               the late 1960s. The 1968 launch of 
                  Leonardo
               , the international journal of arts, sciences and technology, marked the much
               longer history of this kind of fertile interplay, while publications by  and  are merely two examples
               in a string of books in this field. Arguably, early adoption of new technologies is a
               defining characteristic of the creative avant-garde. From the use of photography and
               film by the early modernists and ISDN lines for telematic performance in the early
               1990s, to the subversion of GPS systems and mobile telephones by twenty-first century
               locative and pervasive media artists, technological innovation presents
               artist-scholars with new questions, rather than answers. Indeed, artist-scholars
               working with computing technologies are already using the newest tools and platforms
               in their practices. And with the geopositional turn in so many new media
               technologies, it is hardly surprising that so much of the art in this area is
               concerned with questions of space — its fractures and potentialities.
            We might, therefore, conclude that there is nothing new about the application of
               e-Science tools and methods to the screen and performing arts. Lev Manovich’s
               discussion of the history of the 
                  database narrative
                  
                located within the constructivist film making of Dziga Vertov (1929, Man With a Movie Camera) and Michael Century’s examination
               of the imbricated practices of artists and technologists throughout the twentieth
               century provide a useful historical lens through which to see the current potential
               for e-Science . Whether we look at the work of Natalie Bookchin or Blast Theory, Paul Sermon, Johannes Birringer, Andrea Zapp, the myriad works coming out of
                  ZKM (the German digital arts
               powerhouse, based in Karlsruhe and headed by Peter Weisel) or the Second Life
                  collaboration between artist Lynn Hershman Leeson and archaeologist Michael
               Shanks (which explores the ways in which personal archive might be spatialized and
               animated within virtual environments) computing-based technologies have been at the
               heart of leading-edge arts practices.
            Given that new media arts practitioner-researchers are already working successfully
               in existing collaborative, multi- and inter-disciplinary teams with interoperable
               tools, what contribution might e-Science make to knowledge in this area? On one
               level, of course, e-Science fits Bolter and Grusin’s remediation model, in which the
               modernist myth of the new is complicated in order to explore the cultural and
               aesthetic impact of digital technologies . Nonetheless, by
               exploring the specific uses of e-Science in the context of the workshop, the
               particular, potential impact on the creative arts can be described.
         

            Locating Grid Technologies Workshops
            
               
               A tilde captioned Play a lot of notes / Any notes oyu
                     like / At any time.
            
            The physical environment of the Locating Grid Technologies workshop sought to provide
               an appropriate space for exploring these questions. The setting was a large,
               air-conditioned room on the top floor of Bristol University’s Graduate School of
               Education. Space was created for a four-piece improvisational orchestra, microphones
               and a large sound-mixing desk. At the front of the room, the reader should imagine a
               long stretch of plain, white wall. During the workshop, a man and a woman sit in
               front of one computer and another man is at a laptop. A different man stands and
               gestures towards the band and towards four web cameras, three of which are mounted at
               regular intervals along the blank wall, while the fourth is mounted on the opposite
               wall, at the back of the room.
            
               
               Projection of the camera setup for the workshop.
            
            Projected on to the blank, slightly textured wall are several windows, presenting
               four different camera points of view of another room, somewhere else. It is clear
               that in that other room are also four cameras, set up in much the same way as the
               ones in the first room. Those windows frame four differently angled, full-body views
               of a woman with loose clothes and bare feet. In three of those windows, we can see
               that the woman is joined by several spectators, who sit in a row at the back of the
               room. In a fourth window, the camera focuses on the dancer as she faces the
               projection wall in her room to keep an eye on what is happening elsewhere. The
               orchestra’s conductor signals to begin. A second after the first notes sound, the
               dancer begins to dance. The man with the laptop busily makes adjustments that
               correspond with camera movements and resizing and repositioning of viewing windows,
               which can be layered but not overlaid. The man and the woman at the computer discuss
               what is going on both in the flesh in the big room and via the projections from the
               other space. They try to map these performances by transforming them into nodes,
               lines, text and tags.
            The music stops, the dancer settles and the mapping activity is saved.
            It begins again, but this time the recordings of band, dancer and mapping are
               replayed into the two rooms and performers and participants enter into dialogue with
               the artifacts.
            These workshops sought to focus on a whole cycle that involved performance, recording
               and reworking by using specific e-Science tools, rather than such established
               performance media software as MaxMSP, Pure Data, Isadora or Ableton Live. The
               objective was to assess the suitability of such research-oriented software and
               hardware platforms for creative practice.
            
               
               The workshop room.
            
         

            Collaboration, Tools and Infrastructure
            The research undertaken in these workshops arose specifically out of my interest in
               the relationships between events and their documents and the ways in which space is
               practiced and transformed across media. This is an interest in things as productive,
               shifting, performative. By performative I do not mean activities that are
               performance-like or artificial . Rather, I am keen
               to consider the specific material processes by which relations are enacted. Judith
               Butler’s argument that the body (and here I would argue both the human and non-human
               body) has no 
                  ontological status apart from the
                     various acts which constitute its reality
                  
                accords with this. I was interested in how both institutional and
               computational space (and time) enact specific creative practices but also in how
               different creative practices productively transform institutional and computational
               space (and time).
            As part of the University of Bristol research theme Performativity | Place | Space,
               the Locating Grid Technologies workshops and symposium
               specifically investigated the potential of these Grid technologies to produce new
               understandings of space and time for distributed, creative research practices. Key to
               the success of the workshop series was the effective interdisciplinary partnership
               between the author, as principal investigator, and the Centre for e-Research at the
               University of Bristol's Institute for Learning and Research Technology, the Graduate
               School of Education and the Access Grid Support Centre at University of Manchester.
               The project brought together mixed-mode researchers from the UK, US and Japan to
               generate, analyze and re-use audio-visual documents of distributed practice-led
               research. In doing so, the project explored fragmentations of space and time in
               networked environments by using IOCOM as a telematic performance environment and as a
               dissemination tool for other performance forms; by using a range of software
               interfaces within IOCOM events to record, annotate and retrieve the meetings; and by
               using a Semantic Web database to query that audio-visual archive in such a way as to
               facilitate its reuse in performance, in programmed installation environments and in
               virtual working environments.
            The choice of platforms was based on existing e-Science tools and research
               relationships at University of Bristol, which had hitherto not been investigated in
               conjunction. IOCOM was already in place as the contracted communications grid
               solution and is the dominant platform in the UK’s Higher Education environment. The
               project used two of the University of Bristol’s nodes then in existence: a large
                  lecture type room in the Graduate School of Education and a smaller
                  panel type room in the Department of Physics. Furthermore, University of
               Bristol has a user group in a project based at University of Manchester that was
               developing a suite of software solutions to record, annotate and retrieve
               communications grid meetings. The Virtual Research Environment (VRE) Memetic was a Joint Information Systems
               Committee (JISC) initiative that coupled the recording of meetings with the ability
               to map information, ideas and arguments via Compendium software and the replaying
               and additional annotation of these documents through Meeting Replay.
               Finally, through my work in the AHRC-funded PARIP (Practice as Research in
               Performance) project (2000–06) I had collaborated with Bristol’s Institute for
               Learning and Research Technology (ILRT) to develop the PARIP
                  Explorer Semantic Web tool. PARIP Explorer presents an intuitive, FOAF-like interface to the end-user
               for deep semantic visualization of the connections between people (such as
               researchers and artists) and practice-led research outputs (such as performance
               documentation and interview transcripts). The objective in the e-Science workshops
               was to develop the tool as a proof of concept for the querying of moving image data
               in such a way as to facilitate the subsequent use of these media data in performance,
               in programmed installation environments and in virtual working environments. In other
               words, the workshops aimed to demonstrate how through IOCOM we could devise events
               that would be recorded, annotated and replayed within communications grids settings
               and could be searched and played through a data grid application for future use in
               new creative research practices: production, distribution and use were thus
               linked.
         

            Fragmenting and Mapping
            Of key interest at this initial workshop were the transformations of living bodies
               and immediate proprioception, our sense of how our bodies move in space (see report for
               more details). The fragmenting of performance with musicians in one space and dancer
               in another, with audience split between the two spaces, set up a number of
               interesting challenges. Both sound and image in a communications grid environment are
               marked by significant time lag, making synchronization difficult. Furthermore, due to
               the differences between camera view and eye view, it is difficult to establish
               effective eye contact. The indexicality of the projected image draws workshop
               participants and performers to the eyes of the mediatized face, rather than to the
               mechanical camera lens, which in fact stands in for the human eye. A body moving in a
               projected image extends an arm and another body in a different space wishes to mirror
               that movement. However, as these are not mirror images, the studio-trained dancer has
               to learn to move counter-intuitively. The space of the video does not operate
               according to the logic of the performance space. New ways of performing have to be
               developed in the moment — in the time of performance. At the same time, the various
               interfaces between artefact and performance are precisely what structure the
               collaboration. Fernandez’s notation is used both to guide the orchestra and to
               present prompts for Norman. She does not simply respond to the music.
            A further transformation occurs with the mapping of these activities via the Memetic toolkit. The dialogue mapping
               through Compendium enhances our understanding of multiple practices of collaboration
               by adding a further layer of textual interrogation. In a conventional meeting
               setting, Compendium will be used by a single participant to track rhetorical shifts
               in discussion and argument. The flow of words can be stopped at any time when someone
               requires clarification. The aim is to make decision-making more visible.
               However, here in real time, we cannot stop the improvisation for such clarification.
               At any rate, the clarification of the processes that Norman uses to work within her
               space, with the audio and with the architecture of the room that she is in and of the
               projected windows has a different set of aims and concerns to those that structure
               Orchestra Cube’s improvisation. Although the orchestra refers to Norman’s movements
               in relation to Fernandez’s notational prompts, their practice is not spatialized in
               the same way as is hers. Norman’s movement works both with and against the forms of
               projected images of herself and of the orchestra, whereas the orchestra appears to
               work more with what appears within individual frames.
            Simon Buckingham Shum and I, who work with Compendium, have to begin to make these
               observations in the moment. We cannot predetermine where interesting themes may arise
               in the performance, nor can we unproblematically record the performance to revisit
               later. Achieving this end is, of course, an impossible task, but the process is still
               one that is useful. The speed with which performance occurs allows us to perceive
               activities. However, the time that is required to materialize those perceptions as
               memory-image (; ) and to transform those into scripts in a piece of software means that the
               impossibility of capturing liveness is clear. Yet, by looking at what we
                  do notate, we can begin to consider the relationships between
               performance, Compendium operators and the affordances of the software. On one level,
               Compendium allows spectator-participants to mark points of interest that might be
               revisited for further discussion. Those points of interest are themselves situated
               nodes in the process of transforming performance event into text: the spikes of
               activity that they indicate do not necessarily point towards spikes of intensity in
               performance. This transformation thus renders some aspects of the performance
               invisible or absent, while presencing other points in the performance. In other
               words, Compendium produces new performatives which can neither be separated from the
               performance nor be wholly coterminous with it.
            The recording, mapping and annotating of fragmented performance brings to the fore
               those exact qualities of the live event that escape documentation. When used within
               conventional meeting scenarios, these technologies seek to smooth out chance,
               accident and intuition in favour of design, planning and a sense of teleological
               progress, transforming dialogue into blueprint. When applied within the context of
               creative event, the arbitrariness of decision-making and the excessiveness of the
               live are enacted via the technologies.
         

            Describing and Connecting
            The first workshop generated a range of audio-visual media, from photographs to the
               Memetic recordings held on Manchester University’s servers. The second workshop
               focused on using these to develop ways in which media data might be linked via the
               Semantic Web database application. I wanted to explore this in order to ask how other
               researchers might gain access to these kinds of research practices to generate
               further practice-as-research projects. While Memetic recording metadata are stored as
               RDF in the Manchester databases, the information is only accessible via the Memetic
               interface. But what if practitioner-researchers could use an online tool to search
               for and play a wide range of practice documents, from short QuickTime movies and
               still images to Memetic recordings? How might the practice-as-research communities
               themselves inform the processes by which such distributed resources are described and
               connected through a single interface?
            The second workshop focused on presentations that introduced and described the field
               of data grids for participants so that we could begin to work with the Memetic
               recordings produced in the first workshop. Nikki Rogers (ILRT) demonstrated a
               proof-of-concept interface between PARIP Explorer and Memetic that had been developed
               by Rogers, Ale Fernandez and Damien Steer. This allowed PARIP Explorer to query the
               Memetic database. When search terms such as Kyra Norman,
               Angela Piccini or University of Bristol were entered, still images from
               the first workshop’s Memetic meeting were visualized in relation to the other
               information held about these people and institutions. When combined with the full
               Memetic functionality, there would be the potential to drill down into specific
               moments of Memetic meetings that were tagged with the relevant keywords. In effect,
               were a user to search for dance, improvisation and space, she might well be faced
               with a window showing text, still images, relationships and a video-playing window
               that would play the video recording and Compendium mapping of that meeting from the
               point that was tagged.
            
               
               A PARIP Explorer visualization
            
            The resulting fracturing of performance documentation and its reconfiguration via a
               two-dimensional map of practice-as-research further flattens practice. At the
               same time, via the projected window, this map extends the practices of the first
               workshop into a much broader international setting of cognate work. Where people,
               institutions and practices are rendered as abstract symbols, the ability to expand
               graphical relationships among actors continually points beyond the perceived lack of
               the document to the absent times and spaces of the performances to which they
               refer.
            In order to locate materials they must be described in such a way that both the
               machine and their varied human users may find them. PARIP Explorer uses RDF to
               describe its contents and the simple relationships between objects. This description
               is combined with an ontology based on Web
                  Ontology Language (OWL) to describe the properties, characteristics and
               classes of those objects and their relationships. All of this data is queried through
               the SPARQL query language
               for RDF. RDF relies on a consistent ontology; that is, on a formal description of
               concepts, relationships and terms within a field. While this makes sense for
               developers seeking to produce real-world demonstrators of semantic web tools, users
               now accustomed to Web 2.0 models of interacting with online materials want to be able
               to generate their own descriptions of and comments about these online resources.
            By combining a user-generated component with the semantic web tool, we create the
               potential to build new relationships into these media data. Not only may a wide range
               of screen grammar terms be built in, such as camera angles and movements, but
               spectator memory and performers’ experiences of the space and time of the performance
               may be attached as metadata to the space and time of the video. If we consider the
               use-case scenarios for these materials, since PARIP Explorer does not hold media
               files but rather mines them from other repositories, there is a liveness to the
               experience of using the database. If we consider the potential for search and use of
               media artefacts within subsequent practice-as-research contexts, there are a range of
               material concerns that practitioner-researchers might wish to highlight, having to do
               with the reappropriation of those documents within a performance event when these
               fragments of video time are connected to be transformed once again into the logic of
               the live event. In particular, the spatial and temporal logics of the live event may
               be transformed into these metadata. The aim is not to suggest that in providing this
               form of almost choreographic notation the artist may reproduce the time and space of
               the initial performance event. Instead, attention to the spatial relationships among
               data produces new spatial orientations towards the performance event and beyond.
         

            Combining and Remediating
            The promise of e-Science tools and technologies is their extensibility and
               reconfigurability. The ability to sample and combine data in new contexts has been at
               the heart of much art production in this field. By combining the production of
               performance documents in communications grids with the generative description and
               visualisation of those documents within a data grid, comes the potential for new,
               remediated works that seek to layer visualized space and time to trouble the
               boundaries of where and when events begin and end. These are questions of memory and
               forgetting, too. If, as Paul Ricoeur says, memory is an act of telling otherwise , then the memories that accrue to the media objects held
               within databases in the form of tags and comments might usefully complicate any
               direct associations that may be made between events and their documents.
            
               
               People sitting down at the third workshop.
            
            In the third and final workshop, participants drew from the activities of the first
               two to consider how these media fragments might feed in to subsequent small-scale
               collaborations. A distributed improvisation using IOCOM, the Memetic recordings of
               the first workshop and elements of PARIP Explorer saw Bristol meet with Jem Kelly and
               a group of his University College Chichester undergraduate performance students in
               Southampton’s Access Grid node; with the sound poetry collective mmmmm
               http://www.mmmmm.org.uk, who participated
               from Imperial College London using voice and objects; and with the Access Grid
               Support Centre in Manchester. Dancers, musicians, poets, performers, visual artists,
               film makers, digital artists, sound artists, archive-based researchers and e-Science
               researchers participated in a series of call-and-response exercises. These
               were intended to explore the impact of locational context on performance. Each node
               took it in turn to initiate an improvisatory practice that subsequent nodes would
               then follow.
            
               
               A screen projected on a whiteboard.
            
            By bringing together a very large group of people who do not ordinarily work
               together, we were keen to test the limits of these technologies in order to highlight
               research and development potential for developers. This final workshop scenario thus
               explored how people’s existing practices, developed within other institutional
               contexts and via heterogeneous technologies, might be transformed through an
               engagement with the e-Science agenda. Clearly, a significant barrier to the
               production of sustained creative research was the workshop structure itself and also
               the collaboration with independent artists already familiar with a diverse range of
               computing tools and platforms. Those who had worked in distributed networks and
               engaged in traditional telematic art were underwhelmed by the capabilities of
               e-Science. Yet, the university setting in which these workshops took place is
               unaccustomed to these multi-disciplinary practices. Despite the fact that the Drama
               and Computer Science departments at the University of Bristol are among the foremost
               in the UK, very little sustained collaboration between the two has taken place
               outside of functional approaches to making data more easily accessible. E-Science
               presented the opportunity to begin to build a culture in which transdisciplinary
               laboratories could begin to be planned.
            What became clear, however, is that by the end of this workshop series, in a funding
               structure that supported only minimal work on either side of each workshop,
               participants had learned to understand and begun to work creatively with the
               affordances of the e-Science tools. Once the formality of the room architecture and
               furniture had been disrupted on a number of occasions, and once the seeming
               inflexibility of the corporate audio-visual configuration had been disrupted, with
               web cameras removed from mountings and projectors swivelled to face in multiple
               directions, it became clear that e-Science tools can provide a similar creative
               impetus to existing telematic, distributed and digital performance and art platforms.
               That is, throughout the workshop context, it was the analogue space of the
               institutional rooms and the conferencing configuration of the hardware that
               constrained potential collaboration. No artist would choose to create work in these
               kinds of spaces. Nonetheless, the dialectical relationship between arts practice and
               e-Science quickly indicates that migrating creative practices into institutional
               spaces of the university that are designed for classes, seminars and lectures and
               constraining that creative practice within the temporalities of e-Science is a highly
               useful method for identifying research and development needs. This may not be
               appropriate for the production of good art. Yet, at this moment in the UK
               sector, the opportunity to play with and stretch tools and technologies and the very
               modest funding structures in place for this has meant that only fairly tentative
               progress can be made. Thus, it is particularly heartening that the Bedford e-Dance
               project was the sole successful applicant in the 2007 AHRC e-Science research strand
               as it provides the only continuity between my own workshops and fully-funded work in
               this area.
         

            Aesthetics, Space and Time
            As indicated previously, defining and exploring the performative limitations of the
               institutionalized spaces of e-Science is a key question. The use of IOCOM
               grid-enabled lecture-room spaces placed constraints around what was achievable. Fixed
               cameras, microphones, speakers and projection surfaces, air conditioning, fluorescent
               lighting, carpet glue, concrete floors and chairs with built-in desks all suggest
               particular sets of activities, which were not ours. At the same time, the apparent
               fixity of those spaces clearly inspired workshop participants to push at their
               limitations. Unlike a multimedia CAVE environment, which is set up to facilitate a
               wide range of immersive events, the rooms in universities that house the kinds of
               tools and technologies that artists wish to use are very often not conducive to fully
               realized art works.
            These spaces were mediatized via our range of e-Science tools into frames that are
               themselves suggestive of a techno-corporate situation. While the proprioceptive
               implications of distributed performance have been discussed at length within digital
               performance contexts (e.g. ), what are the implications
               of embodied experiences of moving in a room while watching the projected image of
               oneself and others where that image is framed with corporate branding and within
               which further software is being manipulated? The branding of academic research
               outputs places multiple filters on to the experience of event. IOCOM windows bear the
               IOCOM logo and the name of the institution in the banner that runs across the top,
               placing a very clear frame around the image. The fact that windows can be tiled yet
               cannot be overlaid with any kind of transparency also maintains the discrete identity
               of each grid node. When using the off-the-shelf IOCOM software the
               practitioner-researcher cannot mix institutions to create a hybrid space, despite the
               ubiquity of the third space within telematic work. Bedford’s e-Dance project has
               faced similar issues and is working with its dedicated programmers who are able
               reconfigure the communications grid interface to produce frames that respond
               specifically to the aesthetic and conceptual concerns of individual projects.
            Yet, such issues do not necessarily have to be considered within such a negative
               framework. While the technical glitches, the time lag between image and sound, and
               the low image quality of the H.261 video codec used in the communications grid may
               suggest failure, they provide an interesting aesthetic counterpoint to the seeming
               verisimilitude and heightened realism of much digital media art. They introduce an
               impressionistic quality to the practice that works against the stark borders of the
               frame and the precision of the software applications that appear in separate windows.
               The interplay between the fully haptic experience of the event, the highly compressed
               flatness of the video images and mono sound and the crisp graphical transformation of
               both into the database present specific aesthetic and conceptual possibilities for
               the practitioner-researcher. Specifically, a material concern with projection and
               performance surfaces as architectures (see ; ) offers the artist a way to think about the
               interpenetrations of the different media through a focus on different forms of skins
               and transparencies. Despite the apparent blank solidity of the IOCOM node projection
               walls, their slight texture breaks up the light and produces a micro landscape of
               projected image. Moreover, the image itself seemingly erases the wall in that we no
               longer act as though we see it. Instead, we react to the image, rather than to the
               wall. The wall becomes both window into another world and, at the same time, the
               ability to project on to its surface reproduces a certain solidity.
            Similarly, the materiality of the projection surface is both reproduced through its
               use and rendered invisible as it becomes another desktop on which data is
               manipulated, moved and positioned within a flow of juxtapositions. Bodies, video
               projections and computer visualizations can be flattened into the same conceptual
               space when they are all treated as equally framed data to be resized, minimized,
               maximized or redeployed at will. Where communications grid drivers may be
               concerned to ensure that the windows are aligned and rigidly organized, this enacts a
               conferencing logic at odds with a focus on the specificity of such placement as
               aesthetic-conceptual choice. In the field of telematic, distributed art practice,
               technicians and artists are often the same people and there is a heightened awareness
               of the importance of placement and framing. The collaboration between e-Science and
               the creative arts presents a useful challenge to the developers of these tools and
               technologies to attend more closely to the materialities of their practices and how
               these may shape research outcomes.
            Arguably, the spatializing practices of PARIP Explorer and similar semantic web
               databases raise more troubling questions about the political implications for
               creative artists adopting e-Science tools and technologies. With its emphasis on
               mapping technologies, the role of cartography within research, e-Science presents
               interesting intellectual challenges to those of us who agree with Herman Melville
               that 
                  It is not down on any map; true places
                     never are
                  
               . Given the ways in which e-Science is implicated within the
               military-industrial discourses of U.S. cyberinfrastructure, if arts
               practitioner-researchers are to engage with the agenda in an informed way then we
               have to find ways in which, through these spatializing practices, we can point always
               to that which exceeds the map. A clear and often-quoted example of the political
               implications of this was John Poindexter’s Information Awareness Office, established
               by the US Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). Although defunded in
               2003, at the time Poindexter argued, 
                  We must become much more efficient
                     and more clever in the ways we find new sources of data, mine information from
                     the new and old, generate information, make it available for analysis, convert
                     it to knowledge, and create actionable options…. Tools are needed to facilitate
                     these collaborations, and to support these teams that work to ensure our
                     security…. Doug Dyer is starting a new program called Genisys, which addresses
                     our database needs. This project will imagine and develop ultra-large-scale,
                     semantically rich, easily implementable database technologies. One goal is to
                     develop ways of treating the world-wide, distributed, legacy data bases as if
                     they were one centralized data base, and another is to develop privacy
                     protection technologies.
                  
                Artists need to remain cautious of the seemingly democratic potential of
               making their work so highly visible. Such issues underlie what is commonly argued to
               be the radical potential of live performance . Because the
               event does not produce a single object to be tagged and re-circulated, to some extent
               it escapes surveillance. Yet, in engaging with networked technologies artists can use
               the logic of late capitalism to critique the very idea of total information
                  awareness in that the work must always exceeds its documenting or mapping
               apparatuses. The challenge is to produce artwork that works with the affordances of
               e-Science to question the politics behind its production. In this way, arts practices
               engaging with e-Science may share concerns with some within the Locative Media communities, who use mobile
               phone, GPS and a range of mapping technologies to critique the surveillance society
               through participatory arts practices . E-Science is both
               performative of the desire to invent engines that will make visible and locatable all
               knowledges across time and space and the impossibility of that desire. It is
               performative of its own failure, yet in that failure lays its potential.
            Both the potentialities and pitfalls of e-Science tools and technologies present
               fertile material for the arts researcher, particularly within the area of
               practice-based research: from the politics of surveillance to the aesthetics of video
               compression, from the ethics of multidisciplinary collaboration to the theoretical
               implications of mixing video time and space with the time and space of the
               performance event. Of course, technologies are always-already performative of the
               cultures from which they are developed. They express what we collectively deem
               important and while they open up certain avenues of research they must also close
               down others. Friedrich Kittler has argued that we can never understand media
               because media themselves control the possibilities of understanding, because there is
               no place outside of media from which to understand it .
               The UK’s e-Science agenda presents researchers with an exciting opportunity to
               research through practice the limits of knowledge within a particular moment of
               intensified academic globalization. I feel very privileged to have been a small part
               of the first steps in the arts and look forward with interest to the challenges that
               lie ahead.
         

            Appendix
            Locating Grid Technologies: Performativity, Place, Space: Challenging the
               Institutionalized Spaces of e-Science. The eight camera views and streamed computer
               screen all document the 40-minute afternoon performance within Workshop 1. Each
               camera view is a direct feed through the INSORS grid system rather than being
               generated by independent video cameras.

            Cameras Cam1-4 show the Graduate School of Education INSORS grid node activities.
               Cameras 2Cam1-4 document activities taking place in the Physics Department INSORS
               Grid node. Simon Buckingham Shum, Orchestra Cube and the workshop team present and
               perform in the Graduate School of Education node. Kyra Norman performs in Physics and
               we also see Tobias Blanke of the Arts and Humanities e-Science Support Centre, Nick
               Kaye (Exeter University), Sita Popat (University of Leeds), Michael Daw (University
               of Manchester), Nigel Derrett (University of Bristol). The workshop, however, takes
               place both within these specific places, across the network and across the surfaces
               of the fragmented screens. Each of the camera viewpoints is projected on to the walls
               of each node space and the windows are arranged and resized by users over the course
               of the workshop.

            Simon Buckingham Shum, Open University, and member of the Memetic VRE project,
               demonstrates Compendium as a dialogue mapping tool for use in the creative and
               performing arts. At the 14-minute mark, Ale Fernandez of Orchestra Cube speaks. He
               introduces Orchestra Cube and his conducting exercise, which uses a range of
               notational symbols streamed over the network. He discusses how dancer Kyra Norman,
               who is located in the second grid location (shown by videos with the 2cam suffix),
               may respond to both the streamed notation and the Orchestra's performance. Ale then
               introduces a series of exercises in which performers in each grid location
               participate. The documentation ends with all participants being thanked.
            
               
                  Locating Grid Technologies: Performativity, Place, Space: Challenging the
                     Institutionalized Spaces of e-Science (2cam1). This camera points towards the
                     rear of the Physics INSORS grid node. The camera is placed at the centre of the
                     room space.
                  Footage from Physics Department Camera 1.
                  
               
               
                  Locating Grid Technologies: Performativity, Place, Space: Challenging the
                     Institutionalized Spaces of e-Science (2cam2). This camera points towards the
                     rear of the Physics INSORS grid node. The camera is placed to the right of the
                     room space.
                  Footage from Physics Department Camera 2.
                  
               
               
                  Locating Grid Technologies: Performativity, Place, Space: Challenging the
                     Institutionalized Spaces of e-Science (2cam3). This camera points towards the
                     front of the Physics INSORS grid node. The camera is ceiling mounted at the
                     centre of the room. The projected windows of the 4 camera views and streamed
                     screen from the Graduate School of Education node are visible.
                  Footage from Physics Department Camera 3.
                  
               
               
                  Locating Grid Technologies: Performativity, Place, Space: Challenging the
                     Institutionalized Spaces of e-Science (2cam4). This camera points towards the
                     rear of the Physics INSORS grid node. The camera is placed to the left of the
                     room space.
                  Footage from Physics Department Camera 4.
                  
               
               
                  Locating Grid Technologies: Performativity, Place, Space: Challenging the
                     Institutionalized Spaces of e-Science (cam3). This camera points towards the
                     front of the Graduate School of Education INSORS grid node. The camera is
                     ceiling mounted at the centre of the room.
                  Footage from the Graduate School of Education Camera 3.
                  
               
               
                  Locating Grid Technologies: Performativity, Place, Space: Challenging the
                     Institutionalized Spaces of e-Science (cam1). This camera points towards the
                     rear of the Graduate School of Education INSORS grid node. It is the centrally
                     placed camera in the room.
                  Footage from the Graduate School of Education Camera 1.
                  
               
               
                  Locating Grid Technologies: Performativity, Place, Space: Challenging the
                     Institutionalized Spaces of e-Science (cam2). This camera points towards the
                     rear of the Graduate School of Education INSORS grid node. The camera is placed
                     to the left of the room space.
                  Footage from the Graduate School of Education Camera 2.
                  
               
               
                  Locating Grid Technologies: Performativity, Place, Space: Challenging the
                     Institutionalized Spaces of e-Science (cam4). This camera points towards the
                     rear of the Graduate School of Education INSORS grid node. The camera is placed
                     to the right of the room space.
                  Footage from the Graduate School of Education Camera 4.
                  
               
               
                  Locating Grid Technologies: Performativity, Place, Space: Challenging the
                     Institutionalized Spaces of e-Science. The video is produced through the Screen
                     Streamer function within Memetic and shows Compendium being used.
                  Narrated footage of the Screen Streamer Memetic user interface
                  
               
            
         
