Title:  A Network Analysis of Figurative Topic Classification: The Case Study of 
               
Volume:  018
Issue:  3
Date:  6 September 2024
Abstract:  
           This article suggests a computational method for the analysis of figurative language as a network, using methods from natural 
              language processing (NLP), particularly topic classification and network analysis. The analysis of figurative language plays a major 
              role in literary criticism and, to varying degrees, in other fields of the humanities and social sciences whose orientation is 
              textual. The analysis of figurative language, rather than literal language, poses certain difficulties due to the very structure of 
              figurative expressions. The suggested method in this articles offers a way to overcome these difficulties. By taking as a case study 
              the play Timon of Athens by Shakespeare and Middleton, the article examines 
              the method's ability to provide insights into the thematic concerns of a text, assess existing interpretations, and develop a close 
              reading.
           
         
Full Body Text: 

            1 Introduction
              In The Arte of English Poesie, George Puttenham demonstrates the abusive power of 
                 figurative language by referring to the ancient Athenian judges of the Areopagus, who had decided 
                 to forbid all manner of figurative speeches to be used before them in their consistory of Justice, as mere 
                 illusions of the mind and wresters of upright judgment . Ironically, although the 
                 Areopagite judges condemn the use of figurative language as deceptive, they themselves use a metaphor of a carpenter in their 
                 condemnation, saying: that to allow such manner of foreign and colored talk to make the judges affectioned 
                 were all one as if the carpenter, before he began to square his timber, would make his square crooked: inasmuch as the strait and 
                 upright mind of a judge is the very rule of justice till it be perverted.  As much 
                 as the judges of ancient Athens wish to banish all figurative language from their midst, they prove to be susceptible 
                 to its power from within, unable to shake off the hold it has on their minds. The influence of figurative language is not only 
                 evident here through the metaphor of the carpenter, but rather it is the more subtle homonym senses of the words 
                 upright and rule that truly reveal the pervasive power of the figurative. In 
                 Metaphors We Live By, Lakoff and Johnson catalogue the word 
                 upright as part of the orientational class of metaphors, which rely on our most basic sense of space and physical 
                 concepts, so much so that without which we could not function in the world – could not reason or 
                 communicate . In this article I suggest a computational approach for the analysis 
                 of figurative language, which employs two main methods: topic classification and network analysis. Additionally, this article 
                 offers as a case study an interpretation of the play Timon of Athens by 
                 Shakespeare and Middleton on the basis of the suggested approach to the analysis of figurative language.
              
              The results of such an analysis of figurative language can provide insights into the thematic concerns of a text and the forces 
                 that shape them, enabling us to return differently to a close reading. Unlike an analysis of literal language with natural language 
                 processing (NLP), there are certain difficulties that arise due to the very structure of figurative expressions. In the following 
                 section, I discuss the theory of figurative language, particularly in relation to my argument regarding the network structure of 
                 figurative language. The third section focuses on the computational methods. First, I address topic classification and modeling, 
                 as well as the process of training a classifier using a dataset of four tragedies. Secondly, I discuss network analysis and its 
                 application to the conceptualization of figurative language as a network. In the fourth section of this article, I test in two 
                 ways this method's ability to provide meaningful information on the analyzed text by applying it to the play 
                 Timon of Athens, first by assessing existing interpretations and secondly 
                 by combining the analysis with a close reading of the play.
              
              In the end, computational methods and tools for research in the humanities are only as valuable as the value they bring to 
                 scholars in the field, and they are not the end in themselves. Simply using a computational tool and coming up with various 
                 quantifications is unlikely to prove useful, as Thomas Kuhn argues and Franco Moretti applies to digital 
                 humanities: numbers gathered without some knowledge of the regularity to be expected almost never speak for 
                 themselves . See . Without developing 
                 a critical interpretation of the text, corpus, or subject under research on the basis of the computational analysis, we run the 
                 risk that the work of digital humanists remains impenetrable and irrelevant to scholars in our field who are unfamiliar with the 
                 methods.
              
          

            2 Theory: Figurative Language as a Network
              A metaphor brings dissimilar worlds together into play, connecting one conceptual domain with another of a different kind. The 
                 connection between the tenor and the vehicle of a metaphor (i.e., the underlying subject and the transported meaning) is not a 
                 necessary one, but rather based on substitution and a relative freedom from any constraints that a given context may place on a 
                 word. After the occurrence of a metaphoric transference of meaning between two conceptual domains, it is as though the tenor and 
                 the vehicle simply go their separate ways and the contexts remain distinct. However, this does not entail that a metaphor is merely 
                 a temporary displacement of meaning, but rather that, as I. A. Richards argues in The Philosophy 
                 of Rhetoric, fundamentally it is a borrowing between and intercourse of thoughts, a transaction 
                 between contexts . Although the two parts of the metaphor may remain distinct, they 
                 do not necessarily remain unchanged by the interaction, as each carries a residue of the other. When a word, which had previously 
                 taken part in a metaphor, takes on the role of either a tenor or a vehicle in a figurative expression, it brings along to the 
                 exchange its recently acquired significations. According to Richards: The processes of metaphor 
                 in language, the exchanges between the meanings of words which we study in explicit verbal metaphors, are super-imposed upon a 
                 perceived world which is itself a product of earlier or unwitting metaphor. . 
                 This process of meaning transference through metaphors, which takes place in relation to a previous unwitting layer of metaphors, 
                 I argue, has the structure of a network, a network that forms and reforms out of the various interactions between the metaphoric 
                 components. Accordingly, the two layers of metaphors in Richards' argument, the explicit and the unwitting metaphors, 
                 are two aspects of the same network, the latter being the existing state of the network while the former is the introduction of a 
                 new metaphoric instance.
              
              The computational method that I propose in this article offers a way to systematize this conceptualization of metaphors as a 
                 network. This process is described by Moretti as operationalization, applying to digital 
                 humanities the work of Bridgman in the philosophy of science, The Logic of Modern Physics. 
                 The example that Moretti brings from Bridgman concerns length: to find the length of 
                 an object we have to perform certain physical operations. The concept of length is therefore fixed when the operations by which 
                 length is fixed are fixed . According to Moretti, regarding computational 
                 analysis and literary theory, this means that we are able to take a literary concept and transform it into a set of operations, 
                 building a bridge from concepts to measurements, and then to the world […], from concepts of literary theory, 
                 through some form of quantification, to literary texts . In this research, I have 
                 devised a set of operations that builds a bridge between the concept of figurative language as a network, through a computational 
                 analysis, to literary texts, mapping in this way the interrelatedness of metaphors in a given text or corpus.
              
              The idea of metaphoric exchange as a network is implicitly present in the works of various researchers, such as Lakoff 
                 and Johnson, Hans Blumenberg, and I. A. Richards, though each theorizes about this concept 
                 from a different angle. Lakoff and Johnson's theory of metaphors, in  Metaphors We Live 
                 By, argue that metaphors are not simply a rhetorical flourish, but rather are constitutive of 
                 our perception of the world: our ordinary conceptual system, in terms of which we both think and act, is 
                 fundamentally metaphorical in nature . They distinguish between three major types 
                 of metaphors: orientational, ontological, and structural. In certain cases, the latter is based on 
                 similarities that arise out of orientational and ontological metaphors . This 
                 substantiates my argument regarding the network structure of figurative language, since the first two types of metaphors serve as 
                 an underlying interconnected metaphoric structure, akin to Richards' unwitting metaphors, on the basis of which new 
                 and richer metaphoric exchange is possible.See . That metaphors have the 
                 structure of a network is arguably most evident in Lakoff and Johnson's notion of metaphorical 
                 entailment, according to which instances of a structural metaphor such as time is money (e.g. time is a resource, 
                 time is a valuable commodity), link between all the instances of a single metaphorical structuring of 
                 a concept . Furthermore, entailments do not just tie together instances of the 
                 same metaphorical structuring, but also create interactions between dissimilar metaphors, as Lakoff and 
                 Johnson state: a shared metaphorical entailment can establish a cross-metaphorical 
                 correspondence .
              
              Thinking about metaphors merely as a decorative art, as colored talk, as do the Athenian judges, 
                 according to Puttenham, ascribes the figurative with a secondary status, an optional addition to the real literal meaning 
                 of our verbal expressions. In Paradigms for a Metaphorology, Blumenberg questions whether 
                 all metaphoric expressions are in fact translatable to a literal underlying meaning by introducing what he calls 
                 absolute metaphors: Absolute metaphors answer the supposedly naïve, in 
                 principle unanswerable questions whose relevance lies quite simply in the fact that they cannot be brushed aside, since we do not 
                 pose them ourselves but find them already posed in the ground of our existence. 
                  Blumenberg gives the terra 
                 incognita metaphor as an example of an absolute metaphor, grounding it in the historical experiences of the age of 
                 discovery, to which the metaphor provided an entire way of perceiving reality, a relation to the world that 
                 imagines itself to be standing on the threshold of an immeasurable increase in knowledge 
                 . Absolute metaphors are hence a part of a historical network of metaphoric exchanges, as 
                 they both originate in specific circumstances and they themselves have a history 
                 . Their absoluteness means that they are resistant to conversion into conceptuality, but 
                 not that one metaphor could not be replaced or represented by another, or corrected through a more precise 
                 one . In other words, absolute metaphors manifest in various metaphoric instances 
                 and they too take part in meaning transference, shaping other metaphors as well as being reshaped by the exchanges.
              
              By mapping out the network of figurative language in a text, we construct a diagram of forces, to use 
                 Moretti's application of Thompson's idea (i.e., a diagram that discloses the forces 
                 that have been at work in shaping the network's structure . These forces are a 
                 resonance of the social reality and ideological significations that underlie the production of a text, whether they are the result 
                 of a dominant factor, such as politics, religion, psychology, or of any combination of factors. An analysis of such a network makes 
                 it possible to burrow down to the substructure of thought, the underground 
                 , indicating to us the fundamental certainties, conjectures, and 
                 judgments in relation to which the attitudes and expectations, actions and inactions […] of an epoch are regulated 
                 . Unlike texts low on metaphors, such as legal documents or medical books, texts saturated 
                 with figurative language, such as poetry and early modern English drama, provide us with comprehensive networks of metaphors, 
                 making them especially instrumental for the analysis of this substructure of thought and the ideological forces that shape 
                 them.
              
          

            3 Methodology
              
                3.1 Topic Classification vs. Topic Modeling
                  In order to operationalize the network structure of figurative language, the first step that I suggest is to break down the 
                     figurative expressions into their components, such as the tenor and vehicle, and classify which words in a given instance carry 
                     a metaphoric meaning. For example, consider the following sentence from Macbeth: 
                     Let's make us medicines of our great revenge . 
                     The words medicines and revenge are essential in this figurative 
                     instance, while a word such as great does not carry a figurative significance. It could be argued 
                     that, in a sense, great is also metaphoric, since it ascribes size to an abstract idea (e.g., 
                     revenge), yet if the adjective of revenge was the word monstrous, 
                     there would hardly be a question as to its metaphoric status, and it too would have been included in the analysis. Separating 
                     the various figurative components enables us to trace the repetition of the components in other metaphoric instances, mapping 
                     in this way the multiple interactions that each component takes part in. However, constructing a network on the basis of words 
                     would yield an immense network and, moreover, it would not be efficient for capturing various manifestations of similar 
                     metaphors, such as in Lakoff and Johnson's example, time is money and 
                     time is a valuable commodity. In order to overcome this difficulty, I have devised a system of 
                     classification (i.e., grouping together words into shared topics). Thus, words like money and 
                     valuable commodity are both classified under a topic titled economy. By using a 
                     computational method called topic classification, I have automated this step of the operationalization, a method which requires 
                     several other steps in order to complete it.
                  
                  The idea behind topic classification is akin to another method called topic modeling, in which a computer divides a text or a 
                     corpus into groups of frequently reoccurring words by using a probabilistic calculation.See 
                     . The importance of the probabilistic approach is that words have various meanings 
                     depending on their context; thus, each word has a certain probability of appearing with certain words and another probability 
                     of appearing with others, accounting in this way for the multiple senses of a word.One of the earliest examples of topic 
                     modeling was introduced as pLSI (probabilistic latent semantic indexing) by Thomas Hofmann in 1999. PLSI was later 
                     developed into the more advanced technique called LDA (latent dirichlet allocation) by . 
                     Topic modeling has applications in various fields, including biomedicine, cognitive science, anthropology, political science, 
                     journalism, social media analysis, and others.See , , 
                     , and .  Although topic modeling algorithms have further 
                     advanced in recent years, such as the BAT model (bidirectional adversarial topic) in 2020 and TND (topic noise discriminator) 
                     in 2022See  and ., so as to result in more 
                     accurate output, there are still major obstacles when it comes to the topic modeling of figurative language.
                  
                  Unsupervised topic modeling is entirely automated, a process in which the computer analysis results in groups of words, the 
                     number of groups is predetermined manually, and each group is titled only numerically as topic 1, topic 2 and so on. It is 
                     important to note that both topic modeling and classification take into account the context of words, so that certain words 
                     appear in multiple groups. In topic modeling, however, discerning the titles of the groups of words remains a manual task that 
                     requires active and often subjective interpretation. A list of words considered as a topic by a topic modeling may include 
                     words that human interpreters recognize as belonging to distinct topics, a problem described by Chang et al. as 
                     word intrusion, as in following example: {dog, cat, horse, apple, pig, 
                     cow} . Although here the word apple is easily 
                     identified as the intruder, in certain cases the list of words is almost completely incoherent. This problem is related to the 
                     difficulty of predetermining the number of topics, an issue that affects the degree to which a topic modeling is successful in 
                     creating coherent topics. On the one hand, having a low number of topics may result in overgeneralizations (i.e., in broad 
                     topics, conflating two or more into one). But on the other hand, having a large number of topics is likely to result 
                     in uninterpretable topics that pick out idiosyncratic word combinations 
                     .
                  
                  In general, unsupervised topic modeling works best when the analyzed corpus has a relatively small number of topics, with 
                     optimally few dominant ones per text in the corpus.See . Topic modeling of 
                     encyclopedias or scientific journals is hence highly effective, since each encyclopedic entrance has a relatively clear topic 
                     orientation with a small number of other possible contexts. For example, under Theatre in 
                     Wikipedia are names of playwrights, plays, theatres, and other related words, but one can also find words relating to various 
                     cultures and rituals. When it comes to a text highly saturated with figurative language, using topic modeling tends to result 
                     in collocations of unrelated words, forming incoherent topics in various degrees. This occurs since metaphoric components that 
                     appear frequently together (i.e., they present a high probability of belonging to the same topic according to the algorithm) 
                     nonetheless belong to distinct conceptual domains. And yet, since poetry and plays contain both figurative and literal 
                     language, it becomes possible, to a certain degree, to successfully conduct topic modeling, albeit without being able to 
                     discern which of the topics and words are the ones used figuratively. The possible benefit of applying topic modeling to poetry 
                     is in providing a thematic overview of a poem or a corpus, as shown in the work of Borja Navarro-Colorado, and 
                     yet this is not without qualifications. In his research, Navarro-Colorado applies LDA-topic modeling to a corpus 
                     of 5,078 Spanish sonnets, using various methods in order to reduce incoherent topics. Upon comparing 100 LDA-topics with the 
                     thematic reading of the sonnets by Rivers, he concluded that we cannot find a clear or 
                     constant relationship between an LDA-topic and a theme out of this comparison 
                     . Navarro-Colorado recognizes the problematic character of figurative 
                     language with regard to topic modeling, stating that: LDA topic modeling applied to poetry does not extract 
                     clear and defined themes as it does when applied to scientific texts. […] In scientific texts there are words that are used 
                     exclusively in very specific contexts, related to specific topics. […] The linguistic uses in poetry work in the exact opposite 
                     way. In poetry a word related with a specific topic can be frequently used to refer to other topics. 
                     It was only when Navarro-Colorado further reduced the 
                     100 topics to 81 and then manually classified the rest into 13 classes, thus considering several LDA-topics as belonging to one 
                     theme, that the topic modeling was able to group together texts with the same theme 
                     .
                  
                  As part of another research project attempting to use topic modeling on figurative language, Lisa M. Rhody 
                     analyzed 4,500 poems, arriving at the conclusion that topic models of purely figurative language texts 
                     like poetry do not produce topics with the same thematic clarity as those in Blei's topic model of 
                     Science . This conclusion, however, did not deter 
                     Rhody from using topic modeling, but rather sparked a creative approach as to its application on figurative 
                     texts. Rhody argues that instead of thematic clarity, what topic modelling offers in the case of poetry is the 
                     ability to discern different kinds of discourses, thus leading to a close reading of poems with high 
                     proportions of the same topic in order to check whether or not the poems are drawing from similar discourses, even if those 
                     same poems have different thematic concerns . Hence, it is actually 
                     due to the imperfect results of the algorithm, she argues, that topic modelling of highly-figurative 
                     language is useful for literary criticism, since poetry causes it to fail in ways that are 
                     potentially productive . It is important to note, however, that Rhody 
                     treats the entirety of a poem as figurative, even though poems usually include literal parts as well. Although 
                     Rhody suggests a way to benefit from topic modeling in the analysis of figurative texts, this merely bypasses 
                     the difficulties rather than solving them.
                  
                  A figurative sentence is in a sense antithetical to the idea of topic modeling as to determining the dominance of one topic 
                     in a document, since a metaphor brings together two components of equal importance from dissimilar contexts. Since the purpose of 
                     the operationalization that I suggest is to create a network of the interactions between metaphoric components, ascribing a dominant 
                     topic, even with one or two minor topics, to an entire poem cannot provide data about the metaphoric interactions. For that purpose, 
                     one must ascribe topics to individual words within a text and then analyze their interactions. However, not all words are 
                     relevant, as certain words are not indicative of topics, such as prepositions and articles, which are called stop words in 
                     NLP. In most cases, prior to topic classification or topic modeling, the text undergoes preprocessing that includes the cleaning of 
                     excess linguistic units, such as stop words, punctuation, and names of characters. Matthew Jockers, for example, in his 
                     topic modeling of 19th century novels, found that highly interpretable and thematically coherent topics could 
                     be derived through a model built entirely from nouns . Hence, all the adjectives, 
                     adverbs, verbs, pronouns and so on, were cleaned in the preprocessing. Since in many figurative instances there is significance to 
                     adjectives, adverbs, and verbs — for example when Timon says: feast your ears with the 
                     music (III.vii.32-3) — excluding such words would leave out valuable information from the analysis of figurative language.       
                  Using topic classification instead of unsupervised topic modeling makes it possible to overcome the various problems posed by 
                     figurative language, such as the incoherency of topics and the dominance of a single or few topics in an entire text. In topic 
                     classification, the titles as well as the number of topics are predetermined by the researcher. Unlike topic modeling, automating 
                     topic classification requires pretraining an algorithm via machine learning on a manually classified dataset. Manual topic 
                     classification could suffice when researching a relatively small number of texts, but in the case of big data, training a topic 
                     classifier provides an alternative to topic modeling, one which is advantageous for the analysis of figurative language. Although my 
                     focus is on one case study, namely Timon of Athens, and hence a manual classification would have been 
                     enough to test this method's potential for textual analysis, I have trained a topic classifier both to demonstrate the computational 
                     automatization of topic classification and to provide a basis for future research on a large corpus.
                  
                  In order to create the dataset for training a topic classifier, I have used four tragedies written around the same time as 
                     Timon of Athens (1607).The rationale behind choosing plays from the same genre and that were 
                     written around the same time, though by various playwrights, is to create a domain-specific dataset with a range of examples and to 
                     minimize outliers (See ). The plays in the dataset are Macbeth 
                     (1606) by Shakespeare and partly by Middelton, A Yorkshire Tragedy (1605) by 
                     Middleton, The Rape of Lucrece (1607) by Heywood and 
                     The Bloody Banquet (1610) by Dekker and Middleton.The exact dating of 
                     these five plays is a debatable issue, but in all likelihood they were written between 1605-1610. For the sake of consistency, I 
                     follow the datings suggested by Martin Wiggins in . Since plays contain both 
                     literal and figurative language, the first step was to extract all the figurative instances. Although there are methods in computer 
                     science for recognizing figurative language using algorithms that discern whether a sentence is figurative or not, these methods 
                     do not isolate figurative sentences from a whole text, but rather require the text to be parsed first into sentences in order to be 
                     applied.See   . Parsing 
                     the plays automatically into sentences also proves unsuitable for the purpose of analyzing figurative language, since sentences can 
                     include more than one figurative instance, by which I do not mean simply that multiple words are used figuratively, as is the case 
                     in any metaphor, but that there are at times multiple unique metaphors in a sentence. For the time being, it seems there is no 
                     escape from extracting the figurative instances manually.
                  
                  The number of figurative instances that I extracted from the four plays is 1,388: 146 from A Yorkshire 
                     Tragedy, 482 from Macbeth, 415 from The Rape of Lucrece, and 
                     345 from The Bloody Banquet. The next step of creating the dataset was to determine the number of topics 
                     and the topics themselves before manually classifying each of the 1,388 instances into the topics. Since the topics should be as 
                     relevant to the corpus as possible, I did not decide in advance what they would be, but rather worked from the texts up, gleaning 
                     the topics from the figurative instances and slowly adding more topics. In this process, I experimented with various topics, 
                     observing, for example, that certain new topics were required, or that at times it would be better to split one topic into two, or 
                     that a certain topic was redundant and should be subsumed under a different one. The final result was 103 topics, such as 
                     nature, politics, economy, sexuality, and others (see full list in the appendix).
                  
                  The next step was the manual classification of the 1,388 figurative instances in the dataset (see Table 1 for examples):
                  
                    Examples of manually classified figurative instances taken from the dataset.
                      
                        Play
                        Example — Figurative Unit
                        Topic 1
                        Topic 2
                        Topic 3
                        Topic 4
                        Topic 5
                      
                      
                        Macbeth
                        Let's make us medicines of our great 
                           revenge, / To cure this 
                           deadly grief (IV.iii.217)
                        Medicine
                        Violence
                        Death
                        Emotions
                        
                      
                      
                        Macbeth
                        The repetition, in a 
                           woman's ear, / Would 
                           murder as it fell (IV.iii.217)
                        Language
                        Women
                        Anatomy
                        Violence
                        
                      
                      
                        The Rape of Lucrece
                        Thou hast to our yoke, / 
                           Suppressed the neck of a 
                           proud nation
                        Agriculture
                        Violence
                        Anatomy
                        Character Traits
                        Politics
                      
                      
                        The Rape of Lucrece
                        Vow and / 
                           Swear as you hope 
                           meed for merit from the 
                           Gods
                        Language
                        Emotions
                        Economy
                        Recognition
                        Religion
                      
                      
                        The Bloody Banquet
                        Hunger and 
                           lust will break through 
                           flesh and stones 
                           (I.iv.27)
                        Food
                        Sexuality
                        Violence
                        Anatomy
                        Materials
                      
                      
                        The Bloody Banquet
                        My vengeance 
                           speaks me happy 
                           (III.iii.58)
                        Violence
                        Language
                        Emotions
                        
                        
                      
                      
                        A Yorkshire Tragedy
                        your syllables have 
                           cleft me
                        Language
                        Violence
                        
                        
                        
                      
                      
                        A Yorkshire Tragedy
                        Now is the name 
                           a beggar, 
                           begs in me that 
                           name which hundreds of 
                           years has made this 
                           shire 
                           famous
                        Language
                        Economy
                        Time
                        Politics
                        Recognition
                      
                  
                  
                  Although determining the number of topics and their titles is partly subjective, the subjectivity of this process does not 
                     necessarily undermine the viability of topic classification. Rather, it shows that various classifications are possible depending 
                     on the researcher's orientation. For example, one might decide that art is a topic, while another may wish to distinguish 
                     between several topics pertaining to art, such as paintings, sculptures, and so on. Deciding on the topics depends 
                     both on the corpus and the purpose of the research; thus, if the corpus deals with art, it is more likely that the researcher would 
                     want to distinguish between various artistic media. The subjective decision regarding the topics, hence, yields an analysis of 
                     different levels of the corpus that are not contradictory.Another subjective aspect pertains to the classifying process 
                     itself. Given the same set of topics and figurative instances, two interpreters might still choose different topics for a word in 
                     certain cases. The inter-annotators agreement (IAA) is a method by which the agreement between interpreters can be measured, 
                     providing a status of consensus, in varying degrees, to the classifications. Tthis procedure requires certain resources and hence 
                     will be implemented in a future study.
                  
                  Once I had completed the manual classification of the dataset, I experimented with various NLP methods in order to train a 
                     classifier that automatically assigns each word in a figurative instance to one of the 103 topics. After cleaning stop words and 
                     character names from the dataset, I trained a type of deep learning algorithm called neural network combined with DistilBERT, a 
                     version of the pretrained language model developed by Google.See . Since the original 
                     texts of the plays do not conform to standard spelling or punctuation, I have used contemporary editions in order to maintain 
                     consistency in the dataset and with DistilBERT, which was pretrained on contemporary English. Initially I experimented with 
                     training the classifier on the original texts taken from EEBO (Early English Book Online), without spelling standardization, but 
                     the results were better with the contemporary editions. The source for A Yorkshire Tragedy and 
                     The Bloody Banquet is , the source for 
                     Macbeth is , and the source for The Rape of 
                     Lucrece is EEBO, with manual spelling standardization) . The topic classifier currently 
                     achieves a promising result of 72.94% accuracy (the accuracy is the percentage of correct predictions of the classifier), which 
                     can be further improved for future work by fine-tuning the machine learning process.The F-Score that was achieved was 71.12. 
                     F-score is another important measure of predictive performance, achieved by calculating two factors called precision and recall 
                     (see ). In the process of training the algorithm, the dataset is randomly split into two 
                     sets, a training dataset (66%) and a test dataset (33%), so that the algorithm can compare between its own predictions and the 
                     original ones made by the creator of the dataset, and accordingly the accuracy is calculated. After completing the topic 
                     classification of the text under research, the next step that I suggest for the operationalization of figurative language is to 
                     map the interactions between topics, applying for this purpose a method called network analysis.
                  
              
              
                3.2 Network Analysis
                  Network analysis is a branch of graph theory in mathematics that has various applications in sociology, economics, history, and 
                     medicine, among other fields. For example, in epidemiological research, network theory is used for determining the diffusion of 
                     diseases.See . For the influence of network theory in humanistic research, see 
                     . Network theory is a highly developed field, rich with techniques and approaches as well as 
                     debates, but for the purpose of this research there are specific relevant concepts on which my discussion will focus. A network has 
                     two basic features: the nodes and the edges. The nodes, usually represented by circles in the visualization, can stand for 
                     various entities, such as individual human beings, numbers, places, words, topics, etc., depending on the objectives of the 
                     researcher. The edges, visually represented by lines connecting the circles, stand for the interactions between the nodes on the 
                     basis of what the researcher defines as an interaction. For example, a researcher working on cinema can define an interaction as 
                     the co-occurrence of two characters in a scene, while another researcher may define an interaction only when there is also a 
                     verbal exchange between the characters .
                  
                  An important distinction in network analysis is between directed and undirected networks, each of which represents different 
                     relations between the nodes and is used for different purposes. Directed networks are used for relational 
                     phenomena that logically have a sense of direction , meaning that one node in 
                     the network leads to another and so on, as in cases such as contagious disease or the flow of information. In undirected networks, 
                     the relations between the nodes must always be reciprocated, as in was seen with 
                     or is kin to , as well as in the example of 
                     characters appearing in the same scene. In my construction of the network of figurative topics, I defined an interaction between 
                     two topics as their co-occurrence in the same figurative instance, entailing that it is an undirected network. For example, in 
                     Macbeth does murder sleep (II.ii.37), there is an interaction between the topic of violence and 
                     that of sleep. The interactions between the nodes can be weighted, so that if a topic appears with another topic multiple 
                     times on different occasions, then the weight of their interaction is higher, being the sum of their co-occurrence, which is 
                     visually represented by a thicker line.
                  
                  Another aspect of network analysis is calculating various kinds of centralities, the purpose of which is to measure how central 
                     different nodes are in the network in relation to other nodes.For a discussion on other centrality measures and their role in 
                     humanities see . The four centralities which I will now discuss are degree 
                     centrality, weighted degree centrality, betweenness centrality, and eigenvector centrality. Degree centrality is the measurement of 
                     a node's unique interactions, indicating the number of nodes with which a node interacts.See 
                      and . For example, if a particular 
                     node has a total of fifty interactions, but all of them are with just one other node, its degree centrality would be one. Weighted 
                     degree centrality measures the total amount of interactions of a node; thus, with regard to the previous example, the weighted 
                     degree of such a node would be fifty.
                  
                  Before discussing the other two kinds of centralities, I will discuss another issue that is relevant to these centralities: the 
                     clustering of nodes as well as the core-periphery structure. There are various algorithms that detect clusters in a network, and 
                     although each works somewhat differently, in general they calculate the connectedness of nodes, clustering together nodes that have 
                     more interactions between them. Examples of such algorithms are Clustering Coefficient, Modularity Class, Chinese Whispers, 
                     Link Communities, Hierarchical Clustering. See , 
                     , and .  In a network that consists of 
                     two clusters, for example, each cluster has several nodes that interact amongst themselves repeatedly, but only one node from each 
                     cluster has interactions with the other cluster. Betweenness centrality measures exactly this sort of position that a node occupies 
                     between clusters; thus, nodes with high betweenness function as bridges between poorly connected clusters 
                      . The core-periphery structure, 
                     unlike clusters, consists only of two blocks: the core in which the nodes are highly connected to each other and the periphery in 
                     which the nodes are connected to certain core nodes, as well as partially or not at all connected to other peripheral nodes. Core 
                     nodes, hence, have high degree centrality as well as high betweenness, presenting multiple unique interactions that keep peripheral 
                     nodes connected to the network  . High betweenness 
                     nodes might not be themselves highly connected; that is, their degree is not necessarily high, but they play a central role in 
                     maintaining the network as a whole, since without them the network would either split into distinct components or present weaker 
                     and less meaningful relations.
                  
                  The fourth kind of centrality is the eigenvector, which measures the influence of a node in a network by calculating the 
                     interactions of a node with other highly connected nodes, even though this node itself might not be well connected. In 
                     Centrality and Network Flow, Stephen Borgatti explains the eigenvector as follows: 
                     The idea is that even if a node influences just one other node, who subsequently influences many other nodes 
                     (who themselves influence still more others), then the first node in that chain is highly influential 
                     . For example, consider node A has many interactions with just one other node, 
                     node B, while node B interacts with many nodes in the network, meaning that it has a high degree centrality. In such 
                     a case, since node A has a significant relation with node B, a well-connected node, node A is in an 
                     influential position in the network. One way of understanding this centrality is as a hierarchical system, in which a high-ranking 
                     individual communicates with just one lower ranking individual, while this second in command interacts with the rest of the group. 
                     Simply put, it is not just interactions with a high number of nodes that makes a node influential, but whether a node interacts 
                     with other well-connected nodes.
                  
                  To construct the networks of figurative topics, I used a software called Gephi, which includes many algorithms, statistics, and 
                     filters for analyzing data. When constructing the network with Gephi, I used one file which contains a list of all the nodes and 
                     another file which contains a list of all the interactions. Figures 1 and 2 show networks of the figurative instances that appear 
                     in Table 1, in which the size of the nodes represent the degree centrality and the colors of the nodes represent the clusters.
                  
                  
                    Network of the figurative instances 1, 6, 7, 8 taken from Table 1.
                    A network diagram of the figurative instances 1, 6, 7, and 8 from Table 1. The diagram shows two clusters, a green one 
                      at the top, consisting of the topics medicine, death, emotions, and violence, and a second cluster 
                      below in pink, consisting of recognition, time, politics, economics, and language. The two 
                      clusters are connected through emotions, violence, and language.
                      
                  
                  
                    Network of the figurative instances 1-8 taken from Table 1.
                    A network diagram of all the figurative instances from Table 1. The diagram shows four clusters, represented by the 
                      colors purple, orange, green, and blue. The two former clusters are small and in the periphery, while the other two are larger, 
                      consisting of the core topics, namely, violence, language, emotions, and anatomy.
                      
                  
                  It is important to note that Gephi initially provides a random layout of the network, to which the researcher can then apply 
                     various algorithms in order to detect clusters and organize the network's structure. Thus, when constructing the network of 
                     Timon of Athens for the analysis in the following section, Gephi first produced a random layout 
                     (see Figure 3) of the 4,715 interactions between the topics that appear in the 546 figurative instances extracted from the play. 
                     Figure 4 shows the network of the play after I applied algorithms for cluster detection and centrality measurements as well as 
                     ForceAtlas2, an algorithm that organizes the network by simulating gravity between the nodes .
                  
                  The final step was to assess the usefulness of the text's network of figurative topics for interpretative criticism, whether by 
                     corroborating certain assumptions, challenging existing views, or providing new insights. Ultimately, the computational methods 
                     of distant reading used in this project are merely tools rather than an end in themselves. Topic classification and network 
                     analysis can be meaningful for literary studies in so far as we actively engage with the patterns they reveal and return 
                     differently to a close reading.
                  
                  
                   The initial random layout produced by Gephi to represent the network of Timon of Athens.
                   A network diagram of Timon of Athens, showing a random layout of the nodes and interactions 
                     in black and without any distinguishing features, such as node size or label.
                     
                 
                 
                   A visualization of Timon of Athens' network of figurative topics. Degree centrality 
                      is represented by the size of nodes, and the clusters are represented by the various colors.
                   A network diagram of Timon of Athens, showing an organized layout of three clusters, one in 
                     purple, another in green, and the third in orange. The size of the core nodes in the middle is larger than the peripheral nodes, 
                     and in the core there are topics such as nature, anatomy, economy, violence, emotions, and 
                     food.
                     
                 
             
           

             4 Case Study: The Network of Timon of Athens
               
                 4.1 Initial Results and Assessments
                   Anyone who has read or been to a production of Timon of Athens knows that the main theme of the play 
                      pertains to economic issues, and yet it would not be obvious to say outright that the topic of economy dominates the play's 
                      figurative language. Although it is unsurprising to find out that the figurative topic of economy has high centrality measures, the 
                      fact that Timon of Athens revolves around money, credit, and debt, does not necessarily mean that the 
                      figurative language does too. In the following interpretation of the play, my focus is, first of all, on the major figurative 
                      topics in the network, but this by no means entails that one cannot interpret the network differently and focus on other topics and 
                      their interactions. That at the heart of Timon of Athens beats a struggle with the rise of mercantile 
                      capitalism serves only as the starting point for many researchers, whose focus then varies widely, covering a range of auxiliary 
                      subjects such as gender, politics, religion, aesthetics, and others.See , 
                      , , and . Whether the isolation of 
                      phenomena into distinct domains, such as economy and politics, is rooted in our daily experiences, stems from a mental process, or 
                      only serves a discursive purpose for research does not mean that each phenomenon exists on its own, severed from an intricate 
                      network of ties with other phenomena.
                   
                   According to the data of Timon's network, the three topics with the highest centrality measures are 
                      economy, anatomy, and nature (see Table 2). The various discrepancies between centrality measures, such as 
                      that nature has a relatively low number of weighted degree and a high eigenvector, are in themselves significant indicators 
                      prompting further investigation. Although subjects such as nature and anatomy have received critical attention, 
                      considering both together in relation to economy is usually anecdotal or at best indirectly discussed via related subjects, 
                      such as the relation between reproduction and Mother Earth as an implicit conjunction of body and nature.Works with affinity 
                      to the subject of the body in Timon of Athens include, for example, , 
                      , , and . Works with affinity to the subject of 
                      the nature include  and . Thus, inspecting the relations between the 
                      network's main topics already provides us with a potentially ripe plot that has been overlooked, which can serve for the 
                      development of a novel critical interpretation.
                   
                   
                     Centrality measures of the 21 top nodes in Timon of Athens' network of figurative 
                        topics.
                       
                         Topic ID
                         Label
                         Weighted Degree
                         Degree
                         Betweenness Centrality
                         Eigenvector Centrality
                         Modularity Class
                       
                       
                         32
                         Economy
                         619
                         89
                         239.3801601
                         0.991379817
                         1
                       
                       
                         6
                         Anatomy
                         585
                         90
                         259.0106383
                         1
                         1
                       
                       
                         72
                         Nature
                         395
                         89
                         252.8416508
                         0.994013164
                         2
                       
                       
                         88
                         Social Relations
                         362
                         82
                         179.4518861
                         0.934376098
                         1
                       
                       
                         100
                         Violence
                         321
                         79
                         135.7793867
                         0.935630458
                         0
                       
                       
                         34
                         Emotions
                         306
                         73
                         120.7243327
                         0.874253677
                         1
                       
                       
                         43
                         Food
                         289
                         74
                         113.3206956
                         0.887551213
                         1
                       
                       
                         66
                         Mental Faculties & States
                         264
                         68
                         73.47000376
                         0.851842598
                         1
                       
                       
                         14
                         Character Traits
                         237
                         71
                         95.3921954
                         0.87086153
                         1
                       
                       
                         57
                         Language
                         226
                         66
                         83.74412502
                         0.821104891
                         1
                       
                       
                         7
                         Animals
                         224
                         64
                         72.8268433
                         0.806842635
                         2
                       
                       
                         92
                         Spatial
                         217
                         73
                         99.47052828
                         0.889447093
                         2
                       
                       
                         89
                         Social Status
                         214
                         67
                         88.24516802
                         0.832449686
                         1
                       
                       
                         81
                         Religion
                         213
                         63
                         53.73627786
                         0.816770683
                         0
                       
                       
                         78
                         Privation
                         207
                         67
                         81.58954622
                         0.823603915
                         1
                       
                       
                         64
                         Medicine
                         205
                         59
                         46.00289961
                         0.77185223
                         0
                       
                       
                         36
                         Ethics
                         185
                         65
                         77.70044777
                         0.811462358
                         1
                       
                       
                         76
                         Politics
                         177
                         57
                         50.69770641
                         0.733018315
                         0
                       
                       
                         80
                         Recognition
                         153
                         59
                         65.39706131
                         0.737823402
                         1
                       
                       
                         97
                         Time
                         149
                         62
                         82.31792331
                         0.770353263
                         1
                       
                       
                         85
                         Sexuality
                         144
                         55
                         44.95838577
                         0.726327379
                         0
                       
                       
                         68
                         Movement
                         129
                         52
                         37.85089603
                         0.702173385
                         0
                       
                       
                         16
                         Clothes
                         122
                         52
                         32.44408435
                         0.695025214
                         1
                       
                       
                         82
                         Reproduction
                         122
                         51
                         31.74017266
                         0.680041164
                         2
                       
                   
                   
                     Data of the top 14 interactions between nodes in the network of Timon of Athens.
                       
                         Topic ID
                         Topic ID
                         Weight
                         Labels
                       
                       
                         32
                         6
                         38
                         Economy; Anatomy
                       
                       
                         32
                         88
                         37
                         Economy; Social Relations
                       
                       
                         88
                         6
                         27
                         Social Relations; Anatomy
                       
                       
                         43
                         6
                         26
                         Food; Anatomy
                       
                       
                         100
                         6
                         25
                         Violence; Anatomy
                       
                       
                         6
                         72
                         24
                         Anatomy; Nature
                       
                       
                         32
                         34
                         22
                         Economy; Emotions
                       
                       
                         34
                         6
                         22
                         Emotions; Anatomy
                       
                       
                         81
                         32
                         22
                         Religion; Economy
                       
                       
                         66
                         6
                         21
                         Mental Faculties & States; Anatomy
                       
                       
                         72
                         32
                         21
                         Nature; Economy
                       
                       
                         32
                         78
                         21
                         Economy; Privation
                       
                       
                         32
                         89
                         20
                         Economy; Social Status
                       
                       
                         32
                         100
                         20
                         Economy; Violence
                       
                   
                   The network analysis, it is important to note, does not just indicate that the aforementioned topics are dominant in the play due 
                      to their high occurrence, but also reveals the interactions that these topics have with other topics (see Figure 5). A close 
                      reading of the play that integrates an analysis of the network should also closely read the network itself and consider the nuanced 
                      interactions between topics as well as the meaning behind the various centrality measures. Timon's 
                      network presents strong interactions between the topics of economy, anatomy, and social relations, as the 
                      highest number of interactions that each of them has is with the two other topics. This core trio of topics at the center of the 
                      network branches out through economy and anatomy to other significant topics such as food, violence, 
                      nature, and emotions. The data in Figure 5 shows this branching out through the fact that both economy and 
                      anatomy appear multiple times with various topics, whereas social relations appears only with economy and 
                      anatomy. Moreover, this is evidenced by the cluster analysis, as seen in Figure 4, in which anatomy belongs to one 
                      cluster, whereas economy and social relations to another. The dominant topic in the third cluster is nature, 
                      the relatively high betweenness of which expresses its distinct place in the network.
                   
                   Although the betweenness centrality of nature is quite similar to that of anatomy and economy, relative to 
                      its weighted degree in comparison to these two topics, the high betweenness of nature stands out. This indicates that 
                      nature spreads throughout the network so as to become a dominant force across the play, vital for keeping the relation 
                      between core and periphery, thus maintaining the network as a whole. Timon's mock encomium to thievery expresses 
                      a stance regarding nature similar to the one in the network, as the medium or facilitator for the spread of corrupt economic 
                      self-interest: 
                      
                        The sun's a thief and with his great attraction
                        Robs the vast sea; the moon's an arrant thief
                        And her pale fire she snatches from the sun;
                        The sea's a thief whose liquid surge resolves
                        The moon into salt tears; the earth's a thief
                        That feeds and breeds by a composture stol'n 
                        From general excrement. Each thing's a thief (IV.iii.431-7)
                   
                   An important scholarly debate regarding Timon of Athens is how to explain the extreme shift that the 
                      character of Timon undergoes, from an altruistic paternal figure in Acts 1 and 2 to a misanthropic madman in 
                      Acts 3-5.See the introduction to Timon of Athens by Anthony B. Dawson and 
                      Gretchen E. Minton in  and . 
                      Considering this problem through the play's network can be potentially rewarding, since by constructing networks that include 
                      only the figurative instances of Timon in each of the acts, we can compare them and look for distinct indicators on 
                      which to establish an interpretation. Even without scrutinizing the networks of Timon's first phase (Acts 1-2) and 
                      second phase (Acts 3-5) in search of differences, there is an unmistakable divergence in two major topics, namely the topics of 
                      nature and social relations (see Figures 5 and 6). In Timon's lines in the first two acts, 
                      nature barely appears at all and social relations is a dominant topic, whereas in the last three acts the 
                      centrality of nature increases and the topic of social relations drastically loses its importance.
                   
                   
                     Network of the character of Timon in Acts 1-2 of Timon of Athens.
                     A network diagram of the character of Timon in Acts 1 and 2 of Timon of Athens, 
                       showing two clusters, one in green and another in orange. The green one is mostly at the top right, and the topics of 
                       economy and social relations are the largest nodes in the middle. The orange cluster is at the bottom left, and 
                       the relatively dominant topics are anatomy, ethics, and character traits. The topic of nature 
                       (orange cluster) is at the outer periphery of the network.
                       
                   
                   
                     Data of the character of Timon in Acts 1-2 of Timon of Athens.
                       
                         Topic ID
                         Label
                         Weighted Degree
                         Degree
                         Betweenness Centrality
                         Eigenvector Centrality
                         Modularity Class
                       
                       
                         32
                         Economy
                         50
                         34
                         483.9603896
                         1
                         1
                       
                       
                         88
                         Social Relations
                         44
                         31
                         405.9284632
                         0.880332721
                         1
                       
                       
                         6
                         Anatomy
                         23
                         18
                         146.2821429
                         0.675188214
                         0
                       
                       
                         57
                         Language
                         21
                         14
                         45.21991342
                         0.539625395
                         1
                       
                       
                         36
                         Ethics
                         17
                         14
                         100.9275974
                         0.557258446
                         0
                       
                       
                         14
                         Character Traits
                         16
                         14
                         71.79336219
                         0.44476479
                         0
                       
                       
                         78
                         Privation
                         16
                         16
                         100.6443001
                         0.554277757
                         0
                       
                       
                         66
                         Mental Faculties & States
                         12
                         10
                         12.79220779
                         0.476601138
                         1
                       
                       
                         34
                         Emotions
                         11
                         10
                         12.23888889
                         0.454674607
                         1
                       
                       
                         68
                         Movement
                         11
                         9
                         14.79408369
                         0.389479591
                         0
                       
                       
                         76
                         Politics
                         10
                         10
                         43.71904762
                         0.395413257
                         1
                       
                       
                         92
                         Spatial
                         10
                         10
                         71.79487734
                         0.328565309
                         0
                       
                       
                         38
                         Etiquette
                         9
                         9
                         16.77979798
                         0.34119935
                         0
                       
                       
                         24
                         Death
                         8
                         8
                         21.95440115
                         0.284557476
                         0
                       
                       
                         59
                         Life's Cycle
                         8
                         8
                         11.63333333
                         0.276058103
                         0
                       
                       
                         79
                         Quantities
                         8
                         7
                         5.152380952
                         0.337094561
                         1
                       
                       
                         46
                         Greetings
                         7
                         7
                         8.605591631
                         0.282619898
                         0
                       
                       
                         9
                         Appearance
                         6
                         4
                         0
                         0.180362901
                         0
                       
                       
                         40
                         Familial
                         6
                         6
                         8.871500722
                         0.267522668
                         1
                       
                       
                         43
                         Food
                         6
                         6
                         60.8234127
                         0.239925962
                         1
                       
                       
                         48
                         Hindrance
                         6
                         6
                         0
                         0.235413241
                         0
                       
                       
                         72
                         Nature
                         6
                         6
                         6.145238095
                         0.183843573
                         0
                       
                       
                         77
                         Preservation
                         6
                         6
                         10.39015152
                         0.293944982
                         1
                       
                       
                         80
                         Recognition
                         6
                         6
                         8.692893218
                         0.209711684
                         1
                       
                       
                         82
                         Reproduction
                         6
                         6
                         3.553607504
                         0.336879254
                         1
                       
                       
                         95
                         Temperature
                         6
                         6
                         0
                         0.235413241
                         0
                       
                       
                         102
                         Weight
                         6
                         6
                         21.83575036
                         0.185671487
                         0
                       
                   
                   
                     Network of the character of Timon in Acts 3-5 of Timon of Athens.
                     A network diagram of the character of Timon in Acts 3-5 of Timon of Athens, 
                       showing three clusters: one green, one orange, and one blue. The core of the network consists of anatomy and 
                       violence (green cluster), nature and animals (orange cluster), and economy at the center (blue 
                       cluster). The topic of social relations (blue cluster) is at the periphery of the network.
                       
                   
                   
                     Network of the character of Timon in Acts 3-5 of Timon of Athens.
                       
                         Topic ID
                         Label
                         Weighted Degree
                         Degree
                         Betweenness Centrality
                         Eigenvector Centrality
                         Modularity Class
                       
                       
                         6
                         Anatomy
                         244
                         76
                         606.3598252
                         0.985849569
                         2
                       
                       
                         32
                         Economy
                         244
                         73
                         428.9662156
                         1
                         0
                       
                       
                         72
                         Nature
                         191
                         68
                         351.8092412
                         0.961431577
                         1
                       
                       
                         100
                         Violence
                         167
                         66
                         340.4939345
                         0.922485712
                         2
                       
                       
                         43
                         Food
                         135
                         57
                         243.1157881
                         0.849680136
                         1
                       
                       
                         7
                         Animals
                         119
                         50
                         150.8315495
                         0.776809028
                         1
                       
                       
                         64
                         Medicine
                         118
                         48
                         85.78977267
                         0.770138187
                         2
                       
                       
                         85
                         Sexuality
                         111
                         51
                         89.66273749
                         0.825226509
                         2
                       
                       
                         81
                         Religion
                         102
                         46
                         66.54405658
                         0.770624169
                         0
                       
                       
                         66
                         Mental Faculties & States
                         89
                         48
                         90.1589271
                         0.77762441
                         2
                       
                       
                         76
                         Politics
                         85
                         39
                         60.69431132
                         0.664488522
                         2
                       
                       
                         89
                         Social Status
                         74
                         43
                         91.26195074
                         0.705198613
                         0
                       
                       
                         34
                         Emotions
                         71
                         41
                         60.97845472
                         0.684206861
                         0
                       
                       
                         78
                         Privation
                         70
                         36
                         45.4160434
                         0.613667472
                         0
                       
                       
                         82
                         Reproduction
                         69
                         39
                         51.68189421
                         0.659306452
                         1
                       
                       
                         36
                         Ethics
                         67
                         42
                         83.14964346
                         0.710693991
                         1
                       
                       
                         92
                         Spatial
                         62
                         40
                         101.5889494
                         0.637897675
                         1
                       
                       
                         14
                         Character Traits
                         60
                         38
                         54.23624899
                         0.653338824
                         1
                       
                       
                         88
                         Social Relations
                         60
                         35
                         47.35894261
                         0.623618466
                         0
                       
                       
                         15
                         Cleaning
                         57
                         36
                         56.61245122
                         0.587082881
                         2
                       
                       
                         57
                         Language
                         56
                         33
                         32.14238166
                         0.590324043
                         2
                       
                       
                         16
                         Clothes
                         54
                         34
                         40.62835777
                         0.572474363
                         0
                       
                       
                         40
                         Familial
                         48
                         34
                         60.87014636
                         0.568538294
                         2
                       
                       
                         80
                         Recognition
                         48
                         30
                         27.3187429
                         0.53847421
                         0
                       
                   
                   Another obvious difference between the two networks, which is immediately noticeable through their visualizations, is that the 
                      network of Acts 1-2 is sginificantly smaller and less dense than that of Acts 3-5. However, this cannot simply be attributed to 
                      the fact that one network consists of two acts and the other of three acts. Rather, this difference exists for two reasons: (1) 
                      there is a drastic increase in the total number of words spoken by Timon in Act 4; and (2) in Acts 3-5 there is an 
                      increase in the precentage of words used in the figurative instances in comparison to Acts 1 and 2 (see Table 6).
                   
                   
                     A comparison between all the words spoken by Timon and the words spoken by Timon in figurative 
                       instances across all acts.
                       
                         Act
                         Figurative Instances
                         Words in Figurative Instances
                         Words in Total: Literal & Figurative
                         % of Words in Figurative Instances from Total
                       
                       
                         Act 1
                         22
                         298
                         1206
                         24.70978441
                       
                       
                         Act 2
                         12
                         140
                         511
                         27.39726027
                       
                       
                         Act 3
                         29
                         294
                         562
                         52.31316726
                       
                       
                         Act 4
                         140
                         1865
                         3144
                         59.31933842
                       
                       
                         Act 5
                         26
                         370
                         918
                         40.30501089
                       
                       
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                       
                       
                         Acts 1-2
                         34
                         438
                         1717
                         25.50960978
                       
                       
                         Acts 3-5
                         195
                         2529
                         4624
                         54.69290657
                       
                   
                   
                     A comparison between Timon's top interactions in Acts 1-2 and Acts 3-5.
                     A bar graph comparing the topics of Timon's top interactions in Acts 1-2 (represented in blue) and Acts 3-5 
                       (represented in orange). The graph shows that Timon's interactions in Acts 1-2 deal with language and 
                       social relations, language and economy, and economy and social relations more than his 
                       interactions in Acts 3-5 deal with the same topics. Conversely, his interactions in Acts 3-5 focus on sexuality and 
                       anatomy, reproduction and nature, medicine and violence, nature and economy, 
                       economy and religion, medicine and anatomy, nature and food, violence and 
                       economy, food and anatomy, anatomy and nature, violence and anatomy, and 
                       economy and anatomy more frequently than in Acts 1-2. The most frequent topics overall are violence and 
                       anatomy as well as economy and anatomy.
                       
                   
                   Both the shift in the two major topics, nature and social relations, and the shift in Timon's use of 
                      figurative language corroborate that there is a pronounced split between the Timon of the first two acts and the 
                      Timon of Acts 3-5. Comparing the topic interactions in Timon's two phases reveals this split as well, 
                      as in Acts 1-2 the dominant interactions are between economy, social relations, and language, whereas in the 
                      rest of the play, the dominant interactions are between economy, anatomy, and violence (see Figure 7). On the 
                      basis of the data from the play's network, it is possible to assess existing interpretations of the play and of 
                      Timon's split, as well as develop other possible interpretations. Interpretations of Timon's split and 
                      of the play as a whole are ultimately linked; hence, to develop or inspect interpretations of the former, a contextualization 
                      through the latter is vital.
                   
                   Consider, for example, Finkelstein's interpretation in Amicitia and Beneficia in 
                     Timon of Athens, which focuses on nature mainly through Cicero's notion of 
                     sociality and friendship as relationships rooted in nature: these relationships constitute the state, itself 
                     aligned with virtuous nature . Though insightful and comprehensive, 
                     Finkelstein's in-depth contextualization of the benefits of friendship in Timon through 
                     the classical works of Seneca, Plutarch, Cicero, and others addresses nature's role in the 
                     play in the narrow sense of an underlying condition of a specific political system, the republican state as a
                     natural entity . In the network of Timon of Athens, 
                     the topic of politics is relatively a minor one, ranking between #18-20 among the various centralities (see Table 
                     2); hence, we may question the stress that Finklestein puts on the political aspects of the play. Moreover, the main 
                     interactions of politics in the network are with economy, nature, anatomy, and violence, whereas 
                     social relations barely interacts with politics (see Table 7), suggesting that there is a certain degree of 
                     separation between these two domains, which qualifies Finkelstein's interpretation.
                   
                   
                     Data of the top 16 interactions of the topic politics in the network of Timon of 
                        Athens.
                       
                         Topic ID
                         Topic ID
                         Weight
                         Labels
                       
                       
                         76
                         32
                         11
                         Politics; Economy
                       
                       
                         76
                         100
                         10
                         Politics; Violence
                       
                       
                         76
                         72
                         10
                         Politics; Nature
                       
                       
                         76
                         6
                         10
                         Politics; Anatomy
                       
                       
                         76
                         64
                         9
                         Politics; Medicine
                       
                       
                         76
                         36
                         7
                         Politics; Ethics
                       
                       
                         76
                         67
                         7
                         Politics; Military
                       
                       
                         76
                         66
                         7
                         Politics; Mental Faculties & States
                       
                       
                         76
                         81
                         6
                         Politics; Religion
                       
                       
                         76
                         92
                         6
                         Politics; Spatial
                       
                       
                         76
                         34
                         6
                         Politics; Emotions
                       
                       
                         76
                         28
                         5
                         Politics; Destruction
                       
                       
                         76
                         7
                         5
                         Politics; Animals
                       
                       
                         76
                         89
                         4
                         Politics; Social Status
                       
                       
                         76
                         88
                         4
                         Politics; Social Relations
                       
                       
                         76
                         78
                         4
                         Politics; Privation
                       
                   
                   Regarding Timon's shift, Finkelstein focuses on the relations between economy, politics, the natural 
                      state, and social relations, arguing that in the first phase Timon acts both like 
                      Cicero's friend, virtuously giving benefits without an expectation of favor, and like someone almost opposite: 
                      Seneca's strongman, aloof to his expectations of other's behavior . 
                      Timon, however, cannot have it both ways; on the one hand, the collapse of relationships in 
                      the second half feels like a violent breach in nature, and on the other hand, it points to the need 
                      for a strong political will that can distinguish virtue from venality . The 
                      argument regarding Timon's first phase could be seen as having expression in the networks through the shift from 
                      the topic of social relations to that of nature. However, regarding the second phase, there is no indication that 
                      politics undergoes a change in position (see Tables 4 and 5) or gains a special significance in Timon's top 
                      interactions in either phases (see Tables 8 and 9).
                   
                   
                     Timon's top interactions in Acts 1-2 of Timon of Athens.
                       
                         Topic ID
                         Topic ID
                         Weight
                         Labels
                       
                       
                         32
                         88
                         8
                         Economy; Social Relations
                       
                       
                         57
                         88
                         4
                         Language; Social Relations
                       
                       
                         57
                         32
                         4
                         Language; Economy
                       
                       
                         32
                         14
                         2
                         Economy; Character Traits
                       
                       
                         32
                         9
                         2
                         Economy; Appearance
                       
                       
                         14
                         9
                         2
                         Character Traits; Appearance
                       
                       
                         34
                         6
                         2
                         Emotions; Anatomy
                       
                       
                         88
                         79
                         2
                         Social Relations; Quantities
                       
                       
                         88
                         6
                         2
                         Social Relations; Anatomy
                       
                       
                         36
                         32
                         2
                         Ethics; Economy
                       
                       
                         36
                         88
                         2
                         Ethics; Social Relations
                       
                       
                         36
                         6
                         2
                         Ethics; Animals
                       
                       
                         32
                         68
                         2
                         Economy; Movement
                       
                       
                         32
                         6
                         2
                         Economy; Anatomy
                       
                       
                         68
                         6
                         2
                         Movement; Anatomy
                       
                       
                         66
                         57
                         2
                         Mental Faculties; Language
                       
                       
                         66
                         32
                         2
                         Mental Faculties & States; Economy
                       
                   
                   
                     Timon's top interactions in Acts 3-5 of Timon of Athens.
                       
                         Topic ID
                         Topic ID
                         Weight
                         Labels
                       
                       
                         100
                         6
                         17
                         Violence; Anatomy
                       
                       
                         32
                         6
                         17
                         Economy; Anatomy
                       
                       
                         43
                         6
                         14
                         Food; Anatomy
                       
                       
                         6
                         72
                         14
                         Anatomy; Nature
                       
                       
                         100
                         32
                         13
                         Violence; Economy
                       
                       
                         72
                         43
                         12
                         Nature; Food
                       
                       
                         32
                         81
                         11
                         Economy; Religion
                       
                       
                         64
                         6
                         11
                         Medicine; Anatomy
                       
                       
                         64
                         100
                         10
                         Medicine; Violence
                       
                       
                         72
                         32
                         10
                         Nature; Economy
                       
                       
                         85
                         6
                         9
                         Sexuality; Anatomy
                       
                       
                         82
                         72
                         9
                         Reproduction; Nature
                       
                       
                         78
                         32
                         8
                         Privation; Economy
                       
                       
                         89
                         32
                         8
                         Social Status; Economy
                       
                       
                         72
                         7
                         8
                         Nature; Animals
                       
                       
                         7
                         32
                         8
                         Animals; Economy
                       
                       
                         66
                         6
                         8
                         Mental Faculties & States; Anatomy
                       
                       
                         72
                         100
                         8
                         Nature; Violence
                       
                       
                         43
                         32
                         8
                         Food; Economy
                       
                       
                         64
                         85
                         8
                         Medicine; Sexuality
                      
                  
                  Another interpretation worth considering is Ken Jackson's influential reading of the play, which sees 
                     Timon's motivation for gift-giving in a positive Christian light, distinguishing his reading from the critical 
                     tradition of reading in a negative (Johnsonian) view Timon's giving 
                     . According to Jackson, In creating the sudden split 
                     between the two Timons, Shakespeare actually reveals their proximity. Timon's misanthropy 
                     is implied in his giving. … And so, too, his misanthropy is religious, a necessary renunciation of the circular economy of exchange. 
                      For Jackson, Timon is a kind of Abrahamic figure, for whom 
                     in responding to the call of the other, God, the impossible, a duty to hate is 
                     implied . Furthermore, Jackson argues, Timon is in 
                     a sense caught between the ethical and the religious, which explains his confusing generosity, the way he 
                     simultaneously seems to love others but, in that love, to distance himself” . 
                  
                  The main topics involved in Jackson's interpretation are economy, religion, ethics, 
                     social relations, and emotions. Although in the entire play's network the topics of religion and ethics 
                     are somewhat more significant than politics (in comparison to Finkelstein's emphasis), they are also relatively 
                     minor ones (see Table 2). The topic of emotions is a significant topic overall, but in Jackson's 
                     interpretation it is not as emphasized as the other topics. A closer look at Timon's two networks (see Tables 4 and 5) 
                     reveals that in the first phase ethics is quite significant, while religion is in the background. Yet, in the 
                     second phase religion gains prominence, whereas ethics decreases. These shifts are not as pronounced as those of 
                     nature and social relations but they are significant enough to argue that the network expresses what is, for 
                     Jackson, a radical movement towards the religious in the second part of the play. In the following section, I develop 
                     a reading of the play and the problem of the two Timons on the basis of the computational analysis, examining whether 
                     the play's network provides information that can coalesce into a coherent interpretation.
                  
              
            
              4.2 Interpreting Timon of Athens
                From the outset, Timon of Athens presents the relations between the characters as revolving around 
                   economic value, and throughout the play this remains the key element in defining the mode of existence of the Athenian society. 
                   Whether it is the appraisal of commodities, the patronage of art, the showering of gifts, or the collecting of debt, the play 
                   repeatedly foregrounds social relations through economic exchanges, so as to produce an almost fixed image of the market as 
                   the constant model of human relations . As earlier mentioned, 
                   the network analysis does not just support the interpretation that economic considerations and social relations are closely 
                   linked in the play (Table 3), but also provides insights into the nature of this relationship as perceived by Timon 
                  in comparison to the ruling mode of thinking in Athens.
                
                On the basis of the network, I argue that the monetary economic form defines the social world of Athens, whereas 
                   Timon, in his first phase of the play, perceives the world through the economic form of barter. Building on 
                   Marx's definition of barter as a relation between commodities in which one converts the bodily 
                   shape of that other commodity into the form of its own value , Goux argues 
                   in Symbolic Economies that barter as a relation is equivalent to the social relations taking place 
                   in the formation of the ego, having precisely the same structure as the specular relationship with the 
                   other . Identifying with another brings about the experience of the self, an 
                   identification with the image of the like . Just like 
                   when two commodities in a relation of barter express value in the body of the other, the social 
                   relations of identification create a process in which in each other's presence, the two beings recognize each 
                   other as similar . The three main topics in Timon's network in Acts 1-2 
                   (economy, social relations, and anatomy) are constitutive of the barter form as a mode of thinking and as an 
                   absolute metaphor, since it is the interactions between these topics that bring about the process of social identification as the 
                   symbolic economy of barter.
                
                In his philanthropic phase, Timon experiences his own worth through an identification with the worth he ascribes to 
                   his friends, telling Apemantus: what better or properer can we call our own than the riches of 
                   our friends? (I.ii.100-1). However, Timon's identification is with his friends' collective worth. Thus, on 
                   the one hand, it is as though Timon places himself above each of them as individuals, and yet, on the other hand, his 
                   sense of self is fragmented and distributed among others like his gifts and fortune. Underlying Timon's 
                   understanding of both gift-giving and friendship is a desire for worth and meaning anchored in a concrete, bodily presence, one that 
                   affirms his personal relations. However, Timon does not live in a society dominated by barter but rather by the 
                   exchange of money, an economic form that splits between the intrinsic value and the extrinsic value, between the concrete 
                   materiality of a commodity and its value in the marketplace. Although Timon is not oblivious to the reality of money, 
                   he appears unwilling to accept and internalize it as a mode of thinking.According to Marc Shell in 
                   The Economy of Literature, there is a theoretical necessity for, as well as 
                   the historical fact of, the internalization of economic form in language. Unlike specific topoi, this internalization 
                   is general; it invades and pervades everything . It is important to note that 
                   Timon's barter perception of social relations is not free from economic considerations and self-interest, as he openly 
                   says to his so-called friends: what need we have any friends, if we should ne'er have need of 'em? They were 
                   the most needless creatures living should we ne'er have use for 'em (I.ii.94-6). And yet, Timon expects his 
                   gifts to be reciprocated with the friendship of those who receive them. Furthermore, from Timon's perspective, if the 
                   need for material reciprocation were to arise, it would be premised on this owed fraternity, not on a binding legal document 
                   of debt.
                
                The culture of credit in early modern England that informs the play was, on the one hand, rooted in personal relations 
                   of trust and advanced communal bonds. Yet, on the other hand, at the end of the 16th century, credit became more and more anchored 
                   in legal contracts, turning into an impersonal system in which violent penalty became the mechanism of enforcement 
                   . Timon believes his credit network is one of personal relations, a communal body 
                   that breaks bread and shares one another's fortunes (I.ii.103). The transaction of credit opens up 
                   both a temporal and a spatial gap between those involved, as it postpones the end of the exchange. This gap, when mediated by trust, 
                   becomes a social force that ties a community together in personal relations despite physical distance. However, when legal mechanisms 
                   of penalty occupy the gap, it turns even social relations of close proximity into impersonal ones. To close this gap, as it were, the 
                   English law placed as collateral the body of the debtor in the hands of creditors, permitting them to detain 
                   his debtor's indefinitely, and even to use the objectionable conditions of prison as a means to exact 
                   revenge . Although Timon is explicitly the prime source of nourishment 
                   and money to his false friends, as he is well-aware, it is as though he does not distinguish between the body of the community and 
                   his own. Thus, Apemantus's words ring true when he says: what a number of men eat 
                   Timon, and he sees 'em not! (I.ii.39-40). In this stage of the play, Timon believes that the 
                   bond of men (I.i.148) is a natural relation, that we are born to do benefits 
                   (I.ii.99-100), and yet this belief is but the result of the illusory appearance of an intrinsic value that exists naturally in the 
                   body of a commodity outside of its monetary value.
                
                In Timon's second phase (Acts 3-5), he internalizes the economic forms of money and credit, which demystify his idea 
                   of a communal body and leads him to discover the inevitable self-interest of the individual body and its frailty in the face of the 
                   impersonal law. The rise in the interactions between anatomy and violence in Acts 3-5, as well as the interactions of 
                   economy and food (see Tables 8 and 9), shows that the physical reality of the body itself becomes a pronounced 
                   issue for Timon. When he is denied by his so-called friends, his disbelief derives from his belief in barter-like 
                   reciprocal social relations, according to which reciprocal debts contracted between as many interested parties 
                   as possible over a number of months, or even years, would be reckoned and cancelled against each other 
                   . As Timon experiences this breach in the equality of barter, the veil is lifted 
                   from his way of viewing sociality, revealing to him the natural state of man where previously there was simply no need to consciously 
                   consider it, since nature and social relations had been perceived as one and the same. The shifts in the centralities of 
                   social relations and nature in Timon's networks serve as the basis of this interpretation, as the high 
                   centrality of social relations and low centrality of nature in the first half express Timon's conflating 
                   of social bonds with the natural state to the point of disregarding the latter, while his private revelation of the natural state as 
                   distinct from the social reality turns the topic of nature into a visible and conscious matter for him, resulting in its rise 
                   in the second half of the play.
                
                The nature that Timon discovers is not a nurturing earth that fosters the bond of men and 
                   breeds kinship, but rather the common whore of mankind that brings out ungrateful 
                   man and teem with new monsters (IV.iii.187, 189). As Rizzoli argues in 
                   Shakespeare and the Ideologies of the Marketplace, the play gestures towards the 
                   naturalized image of man and commerce which supports the mercantilist articulation of the market's laws 
                   . For Rizzoli, the play shows that market practices are 
                   thus justified as a natural fact; they are shown to be essential and incontestable as the acquisitive drives they aim to 
                   gratify . Through the internalized monetary economic form, Timon now sees 
                   the natural man as an anti-social animal and yet as inherently economically-minded, driven by the interested 
                   sophistry of merchants and manufacturers, as observed by Adam Smith in his analysis of mercantilism 
                   .
                
                When living in isolation in the wild, Timon clings to the mere idea of intrinsic value, of the material body of 
                   money and commodities as in barter, exactly because it no longer functions as a symbolic currency for Timon's social 
                   relations of identification and because he takes no part in Athen's money economy. Unlike money and credit, food 
                   functions for Timon as the ultimate barter commodity, a paradigm of natural materiality, as it necessitates the 
                   immediate physical presence of those feasting together. Looking closely at the topic of food reveals that it becomes 
                   much more dominant for Timon in the second half of the play, and its topic interactions are with anatomy, 
                   nature and economy (see Table 10). In the second phase, the distinction between the intrinsic value of gold and 
                   that of food finally becomes unmistakable for Timon, and yet they are still inextricably linked for him. Digging in the earth in 
                   search of roots to satisfy his hunger, Timon exclaims, Who seeks for better of thee [the earth], 
                   sauce his palate / With thy most operant poison (IV.iii.24-5). However, instead of nourishing food he finds gold, the poison 
                   of society. Even though gold in its natural state does not provide the immediate presence of value, but rather a social promise of 
                   future sustenance, Timon still associates it with a consumable substance, with poison.
                
                Moreover, in Timon's network, food and animals share strong interactions with violence, 
                   economy, and nature (see Table 10), whereas for the other characters the topic of animals is much less 
                   intertwined with food. Instead, the network I have constructed for the rest of the characters combined shows that for 
                   them the topics of social relations and food are the ones sharing significant interactions, namely with economy, 
                   anatomy, emotions, and nature.
                
                
                  A comparison between the figurative speech of Timon and the other characters, as pertaining to the 
                     topics of animals, food, and social relations. The cells that are colored and bolded or italicized indicate 
                     shared interactions with food.
                    
                      
                      Weight
                      Animals
                      Weight
                      Food
                      Weight
                      Social Relations
                    
                    
                      Timon
                      4
                      Animals; Character Traits
                      4
                      Food; Temperature
                      4
                      Social Relations; Mental Faculties & States
                    
                    
                      
                      4
                      Animals; Men
                      4
                      Food; Social Relations
                      4
                      Social Relations; Food
                    
                    
                      
                      5
                      Animals; Reproduction
                      4
                      Food; Violence
                      4
                      Social Relations; Animals
                    
                    
                      
                      5
                      Animals; Violence
                      5
                      Food; Medicine
                      4
                      Social Relations; Privation
                    
                    
                      
                      6
                      Animals; Mental Faculties
                      7
                      Food; Animals
                      4
                      Social Relations; Language
                    
                    
                      
                      7
                      Animals; Food
                      9
                      Food; Economy
                      4
                      Social Relations; Religion
                    
                    
                      
                      8
                      Animals; Nature
                      12
                      Food; Nature
                      5
                      Social Relations; Anatomy
                    
                    
                      
                      8
                      Animals; Economy
                      14
                      Food; Anatomy
                      14
                      Social Relations; Economy
                    
                    
                      
                      Weight
                      Animals
                      Weight
                      Food
                      Weight
                      Social Relations
                    
                    
                      Others
                      4
                      Animals; Violence
                      5
                      Food; Character Traits
                      8
                      Social Relation; Privation
                    
                    
                      
                      4
                      Animals; Language
                      5
                      Food; Animals
                      9
                      Social Relations; Time
                    
                    
                      
                      5
                      Animals; Character Traits
                      6
                      Food; Violence
                      9
                      Social Relations; Food
                    
                    
                      
                      5
                      Animals; Economy
                      7
                      Food; Nature
                      11
                      Social Relations; Emotions
                    
                    
                      
                      5
                      Animals; Social Status
                      9
                      Food; Social Relations
                      11
                      Social Relations; Character Traits
                    
                    
                      
                      5
                      Animals; Food
                      9
                      Food; Economy
                      12
                      Social Relations; Nature
                    
                    
                      
                      5
                      Animals; Nature
                      10
                      Food; Emotions
                      22
                      Social Relations; Anatomy
                    
                    
                      
                      5
                      Animals; Mental Faculties & States
                      12
                      Food; Anatomy
                      22
                      Social Relations; Economy
                    
                  
                  Once Timon has internalized the monetary economic form, he no longer sees friendship as a natural physical bond, 
                     but rather as inextricable from bestial self-serving drives. Reminiscent of Hobbes's 
                     Leviathan, for whom only the coercive power of the state can inhibit the natural state of man as 
                     Homo homini lupus For Hobbes, before the names of Just, 
                     and Unjust can have place, there must be some coercive Power, to compel men equally to the performance of their Covenants, by 
                     the terrour of some punishment ., Timon sees violent intervention 
                     as the only option against the natural greed of the man-wolf. But, unlike Hobbes, for Timon there is no 
                     remedy in the authority of the state's law, and the only real solution is the total destruction of Athens, which he 
                     encourages Alcibiades to execute. The inevitable course of events for the self-devouring wolf, according to 
                     Timon, is the self-annihilation of mankind, since, as Timon poses, if thou wert 
                     the wolf, thy greediness would afflict thee and oft thou shouldst hazard thy life for thy dinner (IV.iii.332-4). Although 
                     Alcibiades fights for what he considers to be Timon's cause, he ultimately stands for the Hobbesian 
                     solution of coercive law. In contrast to all of the other characters in the play, Alcibiades is the only one for whom 
                     the topic of judiciary is significant (see Figure 8).
                  
                  
                    Network of Alcibiades' figurative topics.
                    A network diagram of Alcibiades, showing four clusters. There is one in green, mostly in the middle, the main 
                      topics of which are politics and military. At the top and to the right is a second cluster in blue, the main topics 
                      of which are anatomy and social relations. At the bottom is a third cluster in red, which consists of a high number 
                      of large nodes representing degree centrality, such as economy, emotions, judiciary, and violence. At 
                      the top left is the last and smallest cluster in brown, the dominant topic of which is character traits.
                      
                  
                  
                    Data of Alcibiades' network of figurative topics.
                      
                        Topic ID
                        Label
                        Weighted Degree
                        Degree
                        Betweenness Centrality
                        Eigenvector Centrality
                        Modularity Class
                      
                      
                        6
                        Anatomy
                        42
                        34
                        351.9583
                        1
                        1
                      
                      
                        34
                        Emotions
                        40
                        28
                        292.5043
                        0.852493
                        2
                      
                      
                        55
                        Judiciary
                        29
                        20
                        99.77756
                        0.650205
                        2
                      
                      
                        88
                        Social Relations
                        28
                        25
                        201.1335
                        0.700449
                        1
                      
                      
                        32
                        Economy
                        27
                        23
                        87.78421
                        0.819049
                        2
                      
                      
                        92
                        Spatial
                        26
                        20
                        64.12568
                        0.71438
                        2
                      
                      
                        76
                        Politics
                        25
                        18
                        89.31931
                        0.621671
                        3
                      
                      
                        67
                        Military
                        24
                        19
                        78.63068
                        0.653487
                        3
                      
                      
                        100
                        Violence
                        24
                        19
                        43.2469
                        0.723853
                        2
                      
                      
                        66
                        Mental Faculties & States
                        22
                        18
                        82.87052
                        0.609653
                        2
                      
                      
                        72
                        Nature
                        20
                        16
                        33.68336
                        0.596832
                        2
                      
                      
                        94
                        Suffering
                        20
                        16
                        44.88906
                        0.550108
                        3
                      
                      
                        14
                        Character Traits
                        18
                        17
                        117.898
                        0.550649
                        0
                      
                      
                        36
                        Ethics
                        18
                        15
                        43.37255
                        0.561572
                        3
                      
                      
                        97
                        Time
                        18
                        15
                        75.28469
                        0.481597
                        1
                      
                      
                        81
                        Religion
                        14
                        13
                        25.92245
                        0.45406
                        3
                      
                      
                        48
                        Hindrance
                        13
                        12
                        28.486
                        0.389575
                        1
                      
                      
                        24
                        Death
                        12
                        11
                        10.88241
                        0.426802
                        2
                      
                      
                        53
                        Injuries
                        11
                        11
                        18.04168
                        0.397426
                        3
                      
                      
                        68
                        Movement
                        11
                        9
                        4.331087
                        0.327932
                        2
                      
                      
                        77
                        Preservation
                        11
                        11
                        29.46892
                        0.269156
                        0
                      
                      
                        84
                        Sensations
                        11
                        11
                        16.09438
                        0.399564
                        1
                      
                  
                  Rizzoli's reading of the play as showing the dominance of the market and its autonomous laws 
                     over any political institution privileges the perspective of the Athenian senators over others in the play, subsuming 
                     Alcibiades under their power by applying to their political actions the contingent strategies 
                     of the market . And yet, that the Athenian society is not in utter chaos, despite 
                     the all-against-all nature of man that Timon depicts, testifies that a system of law is in place, albeit one that 
                     sanctions exploitation through the abuse of credit practices, favoring the economic self-interest of the individual over social 
                     and personal bonds. It is against this kind of judicial system that Alcibiades wishes to take revenge, as he faces 
                     the Athenian senators with his army and accuses them of making their wills the scope of justice 
                     (V.v.4-5). According to Bailey's interpretation, Alcibiades animates the 
                     restorative principal of equivalence in exchange. Thus, his conflict with the senate transforms the 
                     quasi-legal brutality of debt bondage into a state-sanctioned means of affixing relative worth 
                     . Alcibiades is not free from economic considerations, but his 
                     acceptance of the senators' surrender does not entail that he unwittingly falls prey to their economic and judicial logic.
                  
                  Although in the end it seems for a moment that Timon finds solace in the idea of a return to nature in death, 
                     making his everlasting mansion / Upon the beached verge of the salt flood (V.ii.100-1), this 
                     daydream is quickly shattered by the turbulent surge (V.ii.103), as nature and men alike keep 
                     disturbing his gravestone. Even in death, Timon is unable to escape the by-now internalized economic form of 
                     money and the economic nature of sociality that accompanies it. In his final words, Graves only be 
                     men's work and death their gain, / Sun, hide thy beams, Timon hath done his reign (V.ii.107), the ultimate 
                     split takes place between an intrinsic value of materiality, the living body, and an extrinsic value, a gain possessed only in 
                     death, in the absence of and external to life.
                  
              
            

              5 Conclusions
                In this article I have explored a method for operationalizing the idea that figurative language can be studied as a network, and I 
                   have tested the potential of this theory on the play Timon of Athens. The construction of a network 
                   from the topics of figurative instances has proved to be an effective method for the analysis of a text, enabling us to closely 
                   interpret the network relations between conceptual domains. Focusing on small units for topic classification (i.e., figurative 
                   instances, rather than an entire text) makes it possible to create a network of the interactions between topics and analyze the 
                   figurative language. To further develop this method for the analysis of figurative language, it could be beneficial to turn the 
                   network into a directed one in order to explore the relations and directionality between tenors and vehicles. This, however, 
                   introduces a variety of challenges, such as figurative cases in which the tenor is absent textually and only implied. Though the 
                   automatic classification of topics in figurative instances has shown promising results, there are still improvements that can be 
                   made. Several recommendations can be made based on training the classifier to reach better results, starting with reducing the 
                   number of topics and enlarging the dataset, which will allow the algorithm to have more data and less ambiguity regarding topics. 
                   Moreover, instead of using DistilBERT, experimenting with other large language models, such as Llama, Gemini or ChatGPT, could 
                   potentially yield a better topic classifier.
                
                Testing the method suggested in this article on Timon of Athens has been constructive in assessing 
                   existing interpretations, for revealing nuanced patterns that contribute to a fruitful close reading of the play, and for 
                   interpreting various issues that have long occupied scholars. However, it is important to note that although assessing existing 
                   interpretations via this method can corroborate certain assumptions and question others, it does not necessarily detract from their 
                   overall value. Focusing on subjects that have minor significance in a text's network is not inherently incorrect, since any subject 
                   that is of importance to a researcher is worthwhile. That a certain topic appears a low number of times does not necessarily mean it 
                   is not meaningful, as it could appear in crucial parts of a text. In the end, whether certain subjects are significant is a question 
                   of the purpose of a given project and the subject that the scholar wishes to focus on. The network of topics is, after all, but a 
                   graph representation of the text, and it could be mined, as it were, for insights on the various topics that it represents. Thus, 
                   any interpretation could potentially benefit from examining the interactions between the topics with which it is concerned.
                
                By focusing on the main figurative topics of the play, as well as those of specific characters and acts, it is possible to form an 
                   interpretation that ties together the various strands of data presented by the network analysis. And yet, the network of the play's 
                   figurative topics still holds undiscovered riches, veins of information waiting to be dug up, as each and every topic and interaction 
                   in the network could potentially reveal new insights. To conclude, the network of a text's figurative topics can provide us with a 
                   new perspective that brings to light previously unnoticed aspects of a text, drawing our attention to discrepancies that make us 
                   raise questions and rethink what we know.
                
            

          Appendix: Full Topic List
            
              Accommodation
              Agriculture
              Affection
              Alchemy
              Adhesion
              Anatomy
              Animals
              Architecture
              Appearance
              Art
              Astrology
              Assistance
              Breathing
              Character Traits
              Cleaning
              Clothes
              Colors
              Commands
              Concealment
              Consumption
              Courting
              Danger & Safety
              Darkness
              Death
              Deception
              Deformities & Disabilities
              Derision & Offence
              Destruction
              Devotion
              Discovering
              Domestic
              Economics
              Education
              Emotions
              Equestrian
              Ethics
              Ethnicity & Nationality
              Etiquette
              Facial Expressions
              Familial
              Feelings
              Fire
              Food
              Games & Sport
              Geography
              Greetings
              Heraldry
              Hindrance
              Historical
              Humanity
              Hunting & Fishing
              Incarceration
              Injuries
              Joviality
              Judiciary
              Labor
              Language
              Life
              Life's Cycle
              Light
              Luck
              Matrimony
              Materials
              Medicine
              Men
              Mental Faculties & States
              Military
              Movement
              Music
              Mystical
              Myth
              Nature
              Nautical
              Physical Activities
              Physical Attributes
              Politics
              Preservation
              Privation
              Quantities
              Recognition
              Religion
              Reproduction
              Resistance
              Sensations
              Sexuality
              Size
              Sleep
              Social Relations
              Social Status
              Social Unrest
              Sounds
              Spatial
              Speed
              Suffering
              Temperature
              Theatre
              Time
              Transformation
              Urban
              Violence
              Weapons & Armor
              Weight
              Women
            
        
