Title:  Bibliographic Translation Data: Invisibility, Research Challenges, Institutional
          and Editorial Practices
Volume:  018
Issue:  3
Date:  19 July 2024
Abstract:  
        
        In this article, we discuss the main challenges in finding and extracting translation data from national library
          catalogues and the literary press and propose solutions for researchers to access and analyze bibliographic data
          for translations. To illustrate these issues, we present two case studies: the first being dedicated to translation
          invisibility in the literary press, i.e., specialized and general literary journals and magazines, discussing
          overall trends in the Canadian literary press and giving specific examples from the Quill
          & Quire and the Montreal Review of Books. The second deals with the
          institutional practices of collecting and cataloguing translations according to metadata standards at three
          national libraries: the German National Library (DNB), the Austrian National Library (ÖNB), and the Bibliothèque et
          Archive nationales du Québec (BAnQ). By doing so, we problematize how the cataloguing, collecting, and reviewing of
          translated material can be viewed as a systemic issue, highlighting the parallels between these different types of
          practices. We hope to broaden the understanding of translation invisibility by looking at how institutional,
          cultural, and editorial practices inform the cataloguing, collecting, reviewing, and publishing of
          translations.
      
Full Body Text: 

        Quantitative Translation Studies in the Digital Humanities
        Though translation scholars such as Diana Roig-Sanz and Laura Fólica have advocated for and categorize research
          that applies computational methods to translation historySee the panel report on big translation history from
          2019: https://chronotopos.eu/index.php/cts/article/view/3182/3069, a brief look at some important research
          outlets illustrates that quantitative translation research occupies a marginal position in the Digital Humanities
          (DH). At the 2023 Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations conference, for instance, a total of seven papers
          and one panel on translation research are scattered in a programme of over 200 presentationsSee https://www.conftool.pro/dh2023/sessions.php, accessed
          August 23, 2023.. At the 2023 Digital Humanities Summer Institute, no workshop or talk on translations was
          offeredSee https://dhsi.org/online-workshops/,
          accessed August 23, 2023. Also, https://dhsi.org/on-campus-courses/, accessed August 23, 2023.. This sparsity of quantitative
          translation research can also be observed in DH scholarly publications. In Digital Humanities
          Quarterly, one of the central outlets for DH research, we could find only a single title  that explicitly mentions translations or their data in the last five years. The same
          is true for the International Journal of Humanities and Arts Computing . Current Research in Digital History as well as  Digital Studies / Le champ numérique
          do not have any articles on translation from the last five years. The one exception seems to be Digital Scholarship in the Humanities: a search for the keywords corpus-based translation
          studies reveals 582 articles, while quantitative translation reveals 377. The majority of these results,
          however, pertain to machine translation, which shows how challenging it can be to find and identify research that
          applies quantitative methods in literary translation studies.
        While a comprehensive review of the state of quantitative translation studies in DH beyond these few exemplary
          environments is certainly required, this quick overview nevertheless illustrates an absence of translation data and
          its analysis in DH, which, as we argue in this article, goes hand in hand with the invisibility of translation
          itself. On the one hand, the phenomenon has been extensively discussed by translation scholarsIn general,
          quantitative translation research is more so situated in the bibliographic data sciences, information and library
          sciences, archival studies, cultural analytics, and, of course, translation studies, for which the number of
          projects using quantitative methodologies and bibliographic data increase each year. In the last five years, a
          number of titles on the topic have been published: Advances in Empirical Translation
          Studies ; Complexity Thinking in Translation
          Studies ; Advances in Corpus Applications in Literary
          and Translation Studies ; to name but three, not to mention the various
          articles on the topic. At the 2023 annual conference of the Canadian Association for Translation Studies, out of 60
          contributions, at most five or six (including those by authors of this paper) presented quantitatively driven
          research projects. Questions pertaining to bibliographic translation data are, however, absent from the vast
          majority of these studies., though this has mostly resulted in a textual conceptualization of the
          translator’s invisibility  . On the other hand, the
          invisibility of translations themselves has been only marginally addressed in terms of the challenges posed by
          bibliography-based quantitative translation studies ; ; ; . This paper is
          dedicated to this very issue and aims at broadening our understanding of the invisibility of translations by
          looking at the institutional, cultural, and editorial practices involved in the cataloguing, collecting, reviewing,
          and publishing of translations. These problems go beyond a textual understanding of translation invisibility toward
          a data-driven one. Some of these issues, such as the relative availability but dispersion of historical translation
          data  and the limitations of DH methods with regard to translations , have already been discussed. In contrast, we argue that this aspect,
          that is, the invisibility of translations in the literary press, academic journals, national library collections,
          and web archives, speaks to overarching institutional, cultural, and editorial practices.These facts thus challenge
          DH to rethink some of its tools in the light of the specific characteristics of translations.
      

        Translation Invisibility and Bibliographic Data
        Translation invisibility occurs at various levels in the publication process. For example, a translator’s name is
          unlikely to be found on the cover of their work. In Canada, where such translation credit is legally required, over
          35% of translators still struggle to have their name printed on the front page of their publications . On a larger scale, translations are often ignored by literary
          reviewers. Recent studies on translation reviews in publications like The New York Review of
          Books (USA), The London Review of Books (UK), The Times
          Literary Supplement (UK), Le Monde des livres (France), and Domenica (Italy)    reveal that translation researchers do not even bother quantifying translation credit
          because it occurs so infrequently. According to the translation database established by Chad Post for Three Percent, translations represent approximately 1% of the book market in the United
          States [cited by Monti 2016].
        Ironically, what initially prompted the development of the Three Percent translation
          database was the lack of statistics on translations in the book market. Book publishing reports only marginally
          include records on translations. For instance, the Federation of European Publishers’ book market statistics does
          not include any mention of translations . Though other organizations — such as
          Literature Across Frontiers (LAF) — have been reporting translation percentages in the book market , the most recent global picture of translation from 1990–2005 stresses the central
          position of Germany with 7.9% of all literary translations. However, no such reports have been produced for 2022 or
          2023, and publishing data remain inaccessiblePartially because the data needs to be requested from publishers
          directly by conducting surveys (as in the case of the association of the German book trade).. Limited access
          to data on translations and the book market, and statistics on fiction especially, thus contribute to the
          marginalization and invisibility of translation to readers, publishers, and researchers.
        From these examples, we see that while invisibility is indeed a hurdle for quantitative studies of translation, it
          is also revelatory, a finding in and of itself. The few existing translation metrics can inform us about literary
          flows between literary catalogues, or lack thereof, and about the agents involved in constituting and reviewing
          these objects. Additionally, the marginalization of translation in bibliographic data is but one aspect of
          invisibility, which can in turn reveal much about the different definitions given to translation in
          each sourceIn this article, we use a primarily linguistic definition of translation. As such, a
          translation is a publication that has a translator, an original edition in another language, and is
          attributed to an author distinct from the translator (with the exception of clearly identified cases of
          self-translation). Many other definitions of translation are possible, often depending on the source from which the
          data is extracted. We encourage researchers in quantitative translation studies to consider these various
          definitions when structuring their datasets and describing their sources, as in Poupaud et al. (2009, 268–269). and the motivations of translational agents
          in the field, be they domestication (à la Venuti) or repertoire broadening (according to the logic of polysystem
          theory). Finally, DH demands that we document the practices (translation invisibility being one phenomenon) that
          condition how we work with various data sources. This allows us to discuss the space translations occupy in the
          literary field, and also how different agents (libraries, the press, publishers) interact with that space.
        In this article, we present two case studies: the first is dedicated to translation invisibility in the literary
          press (i.e., specialized and general literary journals and magazines) discussing overall trends in the Canadian
          literary press and specific examples from the Quill & Quire and the Montreal Review of Books. The second deals with the institutional practices of collecting and
          cataloguing translations according to metadata standards and challenges for extracting translation data from three
          national libraries, the German National Library (DNB), the Austrian National Library (ÖNB), and the Bibliothèque et
          Archives nationales du Québec (BAnQ). We discuss some DH-related challenges in finding and extracting translation
          data from these sources and propose solutions for researchers looking to access and analyze bibliographic data for
          translations. By doing so, we show how the cataloguing, collecting, and reviewing of translations can be viewed as
          a systemic issue relating to translation invisibility, highlighting the parallels between these different types of
          practices. In describing these different levels of translation data, we hope to provide pointers to DH and
          translation researchers on how they can use invisibility to their advantage, and make this otherwise silent data
          speak.
      

        Case Study I: Translation Reviews in the Canadian Literary Press and Challenges for Large-scale Studies
        
          Beyond The Translator’s Invisibility
          This invisibility of translations has been explained in various ways — cultural, theoretical, and technical.
            Venuti’s well-known regime of fluency in English-language translations explores Anglophone cultural
            preferences for so-called domestication, that is the tendency to erase traces of cultural and linguistic
            difference in literary translations. Venuti’s findings have been echoed by other researchers, with studies on
            translation reviews confirming, for instance, that fluid and idiomatic texts are [still]
            more likely to be accepted without resistance [Monti 2016,
            my translation]. A more recent study of Goodreads user attitudes with regard to translation has shown that these
            preferences are also present among average readers of English-language translations, who often use a trope of loss, mostly linked particularly to stylistic or fluency loss [...]  when reviewing translated texts.
          These cultural norms do little to encourage literary reviews to properly cite translated books, which are deemed
            successful if the process of their translation is unremarkable, in the most literal sense of the word. In the
            English-speaking world, these preferences have been integrated into periodical editing practices. As early as
            1982, translator and author Ronald Christ described how quick magazines were to cut critiques of the translation
            process from literary reviews . Indeed, according to his exchanges with
            various editors, the consensus seems to be that […] unless the translation is notably poor,
            […] it’s simply assumed that the competent translator has accomplished what translators are supposed to
            accomplish […] [James Atlas, cited by Christ 1982]. Cecilia
            Alvstad goes beyond editorial guidelines and explores how translation invisibility is baked into the packaging of
            translated literature from the start. She has formulated the concept of a translation pact to
            explain the invisibility of translations at all levels of readership — from editors and literary critics to
            readers:
          [...] [T]here is [...] a pact-inviting mechanism at work in translations, a rhetorical construction through
            which readers are invited to read translated texts as if they were original texts written solely by the original
            author. [...] [T]his convention is rhetorically supported, even cultivated, by textual and paratextual features
            of translated books .
          According to Alvstad, the invisibility of translations is a reading strategy editors and readers are
            continuously invited to adopt by mutually agreed upon publishing standardsThis might explain why
            translators continue to fight for name attribution of book covers, despite being legally extended this right in
            Canada, as mentioned above   .. As such, we can see how the marginalization of translated literature in
            periodicals and libraries is in fact a reflection of various overarching cultural norms regarding translation. It
            remains to be seen, however, how and to what extent these norms are applied across various publications and in
            various contexts. Keeping this in mind, we can begin to employ interpretative strategies to make this silence
            speak, and draw out meaning from what may otherwise appear to be an absence of information.
        
        
          Translation(s) in/and the Literary Press
          The literary press — an expression used here to refer to any general or scholarly periodical publishing reviews
            of books and short-form original or translated fiction — is not exempt from institutional and cultural trends
            tending to render translations invisible. As noted above and by a number of translation researchers   , translations may go completely
            unreviewed or uncommented, and translators are often not credited in review headers. Indeed, after 40 years at
            the head of Translation Review, Rainer Schulte continues to assert that [t]he field of reviewing translations is still in its infancy . In addition to impacting readers’ perception of translated literature, the invisibility of
            translations in these publications greatly affects researchers’ capacity to study reviewing practices in context.
            Similarly to studies underpinned by library collections as we will see in the following section, existing studies
            of translations in the literary press are often limited in scopeSee, for instance,    
              . While these studies
            reveal much about translation attitudes over time, the role of translators in periodicals, and perceptions of
            foreign cultures in given contexts, all are restricted in terms of timeframe, geography, genre, and exhaustivity,
            among others.: corpora sizes are either determined by the translations identified by periodical editors or
            by researchers themselves, and longitudinal studies are difficult to execute. When dealing with translated
            fiction in periodicals, researchers are thus faced with a plethora of challenges: (re)translations and
            translators can go unmentioned; ephemeral publications and formats may not have been adequately preserved;
            citation standards may change over time, etc. . Historical studies
            of periodicals aiming to identify and analyze translated texts in periodicals are thus hindered both
            theoretically — due to the cultural marginalization of translation — and technically — due to imprecise
            text-recognition and multilingual limitations of software  .
          A quick survey of various Canadian periodicals reveals an incredibly diverse array of approaches to translation
            reviewing, all of which fall within the framework of invisibility. Among the 15 periodicals and two
            cataloguesA complete list of periodicals includes Nuit blanche, Les libraires, University of Toronto Quarterly, Lettres québécoises, Lurelu, The
            Antigonish Review, Canadian Literature, The Malahat
            Review, The Fiddlehead, Prairie Fire, Muskrat Magazine, Quill & Quire, Prairie Books NOW, Montreal Review of Books, Books in
            Canada, while the two repositories of literary reviews were the Canadian Book Review
            Annual and Kwahiatonhk!. surveyed in the context of this article,
            none offer the possibility to filter by translator or source language, for instance. It is not uncommon, however,
            for publications to have a separate section for translated literature: Les
            libraires, for example, has a subsection of its literary reviews dedicated to littérature
            étrangère (foreign literature), while Lettres québécoises and the University of Toronto Quarterly both publish distinct articles dealing with recently
            translated books. The children’s literature magazine Lurelu, on the other hand, uses
            the tag T to signal the presence of a translator among a work’s contributors, allowing readers to identify
            translated children’s books at a glance. A number of periodicals sporadically include the translator’s name in
            the review header, to varying degrees of exhaustivity. At one extreme, we have the Montreal
            Review of Books (mRb), where, with the exception of children’s
            literatureIt is worth mentioning that, as of the mRb’s 25th anniversary
            edition in 2023 and following communication with the authors of this article within the context of a previous
            study, translators of children’s literature are also credited on the pages of this publication., all
            translators are credited. At the other end, we have publications like Books in
            Canada, in which no translator’s name is guaranteed a spot in review headers, and Prairie Books NOW, where books are systematically reviewed in their original language (French or
            English). In the middle, we find most other periodicals (e.g., The Malahat Review,
            The Fiddlehead, Canadian Literature, and Muskrat Magazine), where translation credit is attributed sporadically.
          Of course, translator and translation credit is but one aspect of translation visibility in the literary press,
            though peritextual information in periodicals can and has been used to evaluate translator and translation
            visibility in the target publishing context (as in studies cited above). In terms of reviewing standards,
            however, the greatest challenge facing researchers working with reviews of translated literature is how difficult
            these sources are to identify on a mass scale. Most pre-existing catalogues of reviews, such as the Canadian Book Review Annual, and digital periodical platforms (Nuit
            blanche, https://nuitblanche.com/commentaire-lecture, (accessed April 22, 2024) being a good example) do not allow
            one to filter by a translator’s name and fail to tag translations in any consistent way, thus making anything
            except semi-manual extraction impossible. In many ways, these review repositories are structured in a similar way
            to the online library catalogues that will be discussed in the next section. Such catalogues have been criticized
            since their conception in the mid-90s, for being [...] arranged on the assumption that
            searchers arrive at the catalog knowing at least one of the three access points (author, title, or
            subject) . Under these conditions, researchers seeking reviews of
            translations must proceed via proxy: filtering for known translations, translated authors, or translators;
            keyword searches for variations of the verb to translate or the nouns translation and
            translator in different languages; or looking for mentions of foreign languages. In all cases,
            exhaustive studies of these digital sources are impossible, and translations published by smaller presses,
            translated by lesser-known translators, or from marginalized languages that have been more thoroughly rendered
            invisible by the editing or review process are not likely to be uncovered by any of these methods.
          We can thus see that the implications of translation invisibility in the literary press are multiple. In this
            section, our particular focus will be on using reviewing practices in periodicals to broaden our understanding of
            invisibility beyond the single axis of translator invisibility. While large corpora of peritextual
            information in review headers can indeed act as a proxy for translator and translation visibility in the target
            publishing context, we will also be looking at how qualitative analyses of individual reviews showcase the
            reviewing and crediting practices that work to foreground or background translation in the literary press. As
            Wakabayashi underlines, quantitative DH methods allow [...] greater focus on the ‘mundane’
            translations that constitute the bulk of translation history ,
            thereby identifying overarching institutional, cultural, and editorial trends from which a handful of exceptional
            items emerge. Hence, mixed methods are useful in revealing different degrees of invisibility, i.e.,
            why and how translations are made (in)visible by certain agents in particular contexts.
        
        
          Interpreting (In)visibility in Translation Reviewing: The Case of the Quill &
            Quire and the Montreal Review of Books
          In order to illustrate the difficulties and possibilities facing researchers working with translations in the
            literary press, we will outline our experience curating datasets of translation reviews from two Canadian
            literary periodicals, the Toronto-based Quill & Quire (Q&Q) and the Montreal-based Montreal Review of Books (mRb). As a result of these journals’ position in two distinct English-language literary
            systems, Anglo-Canadian and Anglo-Québécois respectively, both their reviewing practices illustrate the
            well-documented trend of translation invisibility yet showcase wholly different rapports with translated
            literature. We found that, while translation invisibility remains relatively stable over time in the Q&Q, the space dedicated to translations in the mRb — a
            purportedly Québécois publication — has increased over time.
          The Q&Q is a Canadian literary periodical founded in 1935 aimed at writers,
            editors, and other professionals in the publishing industry. It is published in two formats, digitally since 2004
            with an archive of reviews dating back to 1996 and physically (with 10 issues annually). It has a circulation of
            5,000 copies per print issue, reviewing around 40 books every time. Notably, the periodical boasts the most comprehensive look at Canadian-authored books in the country , making it a particularly interesting window for researchers studying this publishing
            landscape. The mRb, founded in 1997, is the official review of the Association of
            English-language Publishers of Quebec. It is also published both digitally (with an archive of issues dating back
            to 2000) and in print (thrice annually). Each print issue has a circulation of 45,000 copies and reviews 29 books
            on average . The publication is characterized by a geographical specificity,
            focusing on books whose author, publisher, illustrator, or translator [is] based in the
            province of Quebec , thus making it an ideal point from which to study the
            intersection of French- and English-language writing in the province. The study we describe here was founded on
            the digital version of the Q&Q https://quillandquire.com/review/, accessed April 22,
            2024. and the digital archive of paper issues of the mRb between 2000 and
            2020https://web.archive.org/web/20201029060549/https://mtlreviewofbooks.ca/archives/, accessed April 22,
            2024..
          Due to differences in reviewing standards at both these publications, our corpus assembly varied from journal to
            journal. While the mRb meticulously includes the translator’s name below the
            author’s in every review peritext, the translator is only sporadically included among the contributors in Q&Q reviews. The relative sizes of the journals also played a significant role in study
            design: on the one hand, with a total number of 1,700 reviews, the mRb was well
            suited to semi-manual corpus assembly; on the other, the 7,642 reviews published in the Q&Q were automatically extracted using Web Scraper (https://webscraper.io/, accessed April 22, 2024). As summarized in Table 1,
            using the presence of a translator in the review header as a proxy, this approach yielded two corpora: 255
            translation reviews in the mRb (15% of the total) and 127 translation reviews in the
            Q&Q (1.6% of the total). Already, we see a large discrepancy in reviewing
            practices, leading us to understand that translation invisibility should be nuanced according to the
            degree of literary contact taking place (here, between Canadian, Québécois and Anglo-Québécois literature).
            Though it is impossible to know how many translations our scrape of the Q&Q
            missed without a manual verification, the disparity in reviewing translations is immediately apparent (see Table 1): despite having nearly four and half times as many reviews as the mRb, the Q&Q seems to have reviewed (or at least
            identified) only half as many translated books in the same twenty-year period. In this case, we see that the
            regional specificity of the mRb, which insists on Québec-published books regardless
            of source language, leads to a greater consideration for translators and translations in the periodical’s
            reviewing and crediting standards than in those of the pan-Canadian, predominantly Anglophone Q&Q. Indeed, even if a greater number of translations was reviewed in the Q&Q between 2000 and 2020, their invisibility in the periodical is nevertheless
            revelatory when placed in relation to the credited translations in the mRb.
          
            Overview of translation reviews published in the mRb and the Q&Q between 2000 and 2020
            
              
              Montreal Review of Books
              Quill & Quire
            
            
              Total number of reviews
              1,700
              7,642
            
            
              Number of translation reviews identified
              255
              127
            
            
              Proportion of reviews on translated books
              15%
              1.6%
            
          
          While our research revealed key differences in the reviewing standards of two Anglophone journals based in the
            same country, illustrating unique features of the Anglo-Canadian and Anglo-Québécois reviewing practices with
            regard to translation, there are also many similarities. In-text mentions of translation and translators in
            mRb and Q&Q reviews are quantitatively quite
            similar. For example, the median number of sentences (1) dedicated to the discussion of the translation in the
            body of reviews is the same in both journals (Figure 1). Between 2000 and 2020, in
            the Q&Q and the mRb alike, only one sentence out of
            each review is used to review the translator’s work or to comment on the quality of the translation process. A
            quantitative picture of the reviews reveals that almost 40% of all reviews in both periodicals make no mention of
            translation whatsoever:
          
            Proportion of sentences in translation reviews from the Q&Q and the mRb dedicated to questions of translation and translatorship.
            
            a bar chart plotting reviews vs % dedicated to translation decreasing dramatically after 1–10%
          
          As we see in Figure 1, only a marginal number of reviews in the mRb and Q&Q take note of translation issues and comment on
            them in length. The traditional paradigm of translation invisibility does not appear to have been challenged in
            any meaningful way. The same impression persists on when we zoom in from a sentence- to a word-level analysis of
            these translation reviews. For instance, the 25 most frequent words employed in reviews of translated books in
            the two journals were near identical (Table 2):
          
            Net frequencies of the 25 most common words in translation reviews in the mRb
              and the Q&Q between 2000 and 2020
            
              Ranking
              Montreal Review of Books
              Quill & Quire
            
            
              1
              book
              book
            
            
              2
              novel
              novel
            
            
              3
              life
              story
            
            
              4
              story
              life
            
            
              5
              world
              quebec
            
            
              6
              quebec
              world
            
            
              7
              time
              french
            
            
              8
              french
              narrator
            
            
              9
              english
              readers
            
            
              10
              characters
              english
            
            
              11
              own
              author
            
            
              12
              mother
              translation
            
            
              13
              love
              narrative
            
            
              14
              narrator
              father
            
            
              15
              father
              montreal
            
            
              16
              people
              love
            
            
              17
              montreal
              mother
            
            
              18
              translation
              family
            
            
              19
              family
              little
            
            
              20
              reader
              reader
            
            
              21
              stories
              language
            
            
              22
              author
              time
            
            
              23
              readers
              own
            
            
              24
              narrative
              books
            
            
              25
              little
              children
            
          
          What is most striking about these two lists is their similarity in terms of both words present and ranking.
            Translation remains a marginal question, with few words on these lists used to describe the process — we should
            note the presence of French, English (among the top 10 in both columns of Table 2), translation, and language, but the absence of the
            word translatorWhile this article deals primarily with so-called translation invisibility, it
            is important to note that many other figures involved in book publishing have also been marginalized to various
            degrees — editors, literary agents, and cover artists, for instance — and are equally absent from these reviews
            and lie beyond the scope of our analysis. For a discussion of editorial invisibility, for instance, see  . as well as any evaluative terms
            relating to this agent’s work. At first view, it does indeed appear as though both these periodicals treat
            translated literature nearly identically. Table 2 plausibly suggests that the mRb and the Q&Q have adopted similar postures, both
            tending to marginalize translated literature in book reviews.
          Yet, what our synchronic, distant reading of these reviews and their peritextual information in the respective
            periodicals has not revealed are the micro-trends that demonstrate the many ways in which translation
            invisibility evolved between 2000 and 2020 and how it has been leveraged by editors to suit other cultural or
            literary agendas. In order to interpret these relatively silent corpora of translation reviews and their
            peritexts, we must pair our previous DH analysis with a diachronic, close reading of the data revealed by these
            preliminary quantitative analyses. A closer analysis of translation reviews in the Q&Q, for instance, revealed a series of outliers that showcase various editorial strategies that
            have contributed to increasing the visibility of translationsThe results of this analysis of Q&Q reviews were first presented at the CATS 35th annual congress in May 2023..
            We see, for instance, that the presence of the translator’s name on the cover, a translator’s note, or a glossary
            all increase the chances of a thorough translation review  . This is the case for works such as One, written by Serge Thibodeau and
            translated by Jo-Ann Elder, which features the translator’s name and input prominently. The reviewer, Zachariah
            Wells, dedicated over three quarters (77%) of the review’s sentences to translation commentary and distinguishes
            between the original (Seul on est) and the translation, which he calls Elder’s One . In
            another notable case, half of the body of the review of Sanaaq by Mitiarjuk
            Nappaaluk, translated from Inuktitut into French by Bernard Saladin d’Anglure and from French into English by
            Peter Frost, is used to discuss translation. While the review is not positive — the constant
            pain to which an English reader is put to check the glossary for untranslated Inuktitut words becomes
            tiresome  — it quickly becomes clear that its author’s Inuit
            background is of great interest when it comes to translation. Reviewer Bruce Whiteman concludes that Sanaaq is an important cultural and literary document (2014, ¶3) that can now be read by English-speaking readers.
          Similar trends characterize translation reviews in the mRb. Not only did we find an
            evolution in the types of translation commentary over time, with an increasing number of reviews interested in
            translator agency and source-culture representation   , but a high number of reviews in this periodical are also written by fellow
            translatorsFor a close reading and analysis of translation reviews published in the mRb between 2000 and 2020 .. For example, while early
            reviews in the mRb tended to focus on how [e]ach language has a
            unique syntactic style that defies perfect translation , later reviews
            praised the creative choices made by certain translators — [Oana Avasilichioaei’s]
            creative use of the pronouns s/he, hir, hirself, e,
            em, and eir when representing Tiresias while in a state of flux is especially
            inspired . Additionally, certain reviews of canonical Québécois
            texts by figures like Dany Laferrière  and Kim Thúy 
            conduct interviews with the authors in English and strategically avoid identifying these works as translations.
            These choices contribute to the geographical specificity of the Anglo-Québécois literary repertoire represented
            in the mRb and illustrating how translation invisibility can be instrumentalized in
            certain target culture contextsFor the reverse trend, that is the assimilation of Anglo-Québécois
            translated into French in Quebec  .
          As we can see, though predominant reviewing standards tending to invisibilize translations in the literary press
            apply at both the mRb and the Q&Q, interpretative
            strategies abound and allow us to draw conclusions that go beyond an unfaceted translation invisibility
            framework. The examples above illustrate the importance of mixed methods for these readings: starting with
            classic DH synchronic distant readings, which tend to flatten differences between our sources and make
            invisibility stand out, and turning next toward diachronic, context-informed close readings of the results
            generated. As demonstrated in the case of the Q&Q and the mRb, while distant reading methods provide us with a general context for a larger corpus of translations
            and their reviews, close readings reveal evolutions in predominant conceptions and expectations of translated
            literature as well as certain strategic manipulations of literary repertoires by translators, editors, and
            reviewers alike. As we will see in library collections and catalogues, the invisibility of translations in the
            literary press is incredibly multifaceted and nuanced, demonstrating the contribution of large-scale corpus
            studies of these new sources of information. These newly available corpora of texts can now be studied on a great
            enough scale to make their apparent silence speak volumes, revealing patterns that could not be registered
            through older, traditionally text-focused methods in translation studies.
        
      

        Case Study II: Institutional Practices of Cataloguing and Collecting Translations in the DNB, ONB, and
          BAnQ
        
          Cataloguing Translations and the Library as a Living Archive
          
            Each catalog record is the product of a complex yet hidden negotiation between a
              cataloguer and the constraints of library systems and practices.
          
          As Belantara and Bradinski point out in their 2022 ethnographic study of cataloguers at work, library
            cataloguing is still a black box, and practices can sometimes be revealed only by close collaboration with the
            librarians who create this metadataBelantara and Bradinski’s study showed to what extent cataloguing
            practices represent a process of negotiation of the cataloguer with the existing metadata standards such as MARC.
            They claim that [m]etadata reflects a compromise between what the cataloger knows about an
            item and the existing system into which she is bound to embed it .. For example, when approaching the DNB’s digital services (Abteilung
            Digitale Dienste der Deutschen Nationalbibliothek) for curating a dataset of German fiction in
            translation , we noted that it was possible to query the catalogue and filter the
            collection for translations using the language field contained in the metadata. What was less obvious, and what
            DNB librarians confirmed, is that the language field had only been in use for items catalogued since 1996,
            meaning that the metadata from before that date was still being updated. This shift highlights the fact that
            translation invisibility is strongly tied to cataloguing and collection practicesIn this article,
            cataloguing practices encompasses the process of how the information on the records (author, publisher, year,
            edition, etc.) is curated and published in the online catalogue so that the user can browse, filter, and access
            the collection as well as the bibliographic data. Accordingly, the online catalogue represents the interface or
            index that allows us to see what the collection contains. In comparison, collection practices describe the
            process of adding editions to the library collection according to the deposit regulations — described in detail
            in the last subsection., not mention that metadata standards that need to be contextualized and documented
            over timeHence, researchers should be cautious to either run analyses on recent data (e.g., a researcher
            may choose to exclude pre-1996 data extracted from the DNB), or contextualize changing cataloguing practices when
            dealing with earlier DNB datasets.. We can think of the library as a living archive, where entries and
            their information are added and redacted on a running basis. Hence, it can be challenging to unravel on what
            basis translations are catalogued, how they are catalogued, and in what ways they can be extracted using a
            replicable method. This, in turn, results in the sparsity and rare utilization of library metadata for curating a
            translation dataset.
          As evoked in the introduction, translation datasets remain sparse in and beyond DH. Additionally, due to the
            lack of a formalized method with respect to cataloguing practices and standards, it remains difficult to access
            and extract bibliographic data on translations from national collections. Diana Roig-Sanz and Laura Folica (2021, 242) stress that libraries as sources for metadata remain
            largely unexploited, while scholars like Susan Pickford have repeatedly insisted on how incomplete existing
            databases such as the Index Translationum or VIAF are for bibliographic translation
            data A data quality assessment of these databases revealed that their
            translation data appears to be less comprehensive as compared to the German National Library .. Bibliographic dataAccording to the Bibliographic Data
            Working Group (BDWG), [b]ibliographical data are structured information about the form,
            content, and context of documents in any form (textual, graphic, musical notation, etc.) or medium (printed,
            electronic, etc.) . contain information on the author,
            publisher, language, etc. of a given edition and are typically collected and maintained by libraries Bibliographic data on translations is also collected by companies for
            marketing purposes or other institutions such as UNESCO in case of the Index
            Translationum, publishing agencies, foundations, or alliances such as Bücher in Zahlen, Literatures
            Across Frontiers, European, and the Federation of European Publishers. The BDWG also notes that [t]oday OCLC’s WorldCat is the main service used to access the currently collected contents of
            library catalogues . This is the case for the German National
            Library, though their collection and deposit regulations differ slightly, which we discuss in the last subsection
            of this case study. according to strict metadata standards such as MARC (Machine-Readable Cataloguing
            record),MARC can be defined as a [s]tandard for the representation and exchange of
            data in machine-readable form , which provides the mechanism by which computers exchange, use, and interpret bibliographic information, and its data
            elements make up the foundation of most library catalogs used today Dublin
            Core, or the Library of Congress Classification. Translations bring with them specific characteristics to
            bibliographic data, one of them being that language has a rather high importance, and an imposed relationship to
            an original edition (which may or may not be documented). Additional creators of translated editions, such as
            translators, original publishers, etc., also need to be contained in the bibliographic data. All this information
            indicates to the user of the library catalogue whether the edition is a translation or not, a fact which is not
            always apparent and poses specific challenges for the extraction of bibliographic data. An additional issue is
            that translation-specific information may be in the metadata but not included in the online catalogue, which
            further marginalizes translations. Utilizing the library’s bibliographic translation data therefore requires that
            the data be available, accessible, and that cataloguing practices make it possible to extract them.
          Unfortunately, as we saw in the previous section and continue to illustrate below, this can be very challenging:
            the invisibility of translations in library catalogues results in a sparsity of translation data, which
            oftentimes prompts scholars to curate a dataset semi-manually    . Projects that
            make use of bibliographic translation data are therefore mainly case-study specific and limited to the
            translations of a single author, such as the Jane Eyre project by Reynolds and
            Vitali (2021); a single genre; a single source or target language, such as
            the project Intra-Belgian literary translations since 1970 .The Digital Library
            & Bibliography for Literature in Translation and Adaptation (DLBT) is another constantly expanding project
            that collects bibliographic data on translation from national libraries such as the DNB and from research
            projects. While these studies do use bibliographic data and sometimes draw on library collections for
            their datasets, they also all highlight the necessity for semi-manual curation due to the difficulties in
            identifying translations in the respective library catalogues, extracting these records, and the limitations in
            applying these methods to other sources of dataSeveral scholars working with translation data have noted
            similar difficulties in a panel discussion on big translation history that took place at the Congress of the
            European Society for Translation Studies in Stellenbosch in September of 2019 ..
          An important issue with former, case-study specific research is that manual data curation practises do not allow
            for the (re)use of formalized operations that can be replicated, both in terms of data extraction and
            quantitative analyses that can be generalized across different datasets. As we show in this section, extracting
            bibliographic translation data from different libraries (since researchers often work with more than one source:
            for Germanophone literature, we have the Swiss, German, and Austrian national libraries besides the German, while
            for Québécois Francophone literature, we must work with Québec and the French library collections) poses
            challenges and highlights the limitations and possibilities of harvesting these data with a single formalized
            method. The aim of presenting this case study hence is to describe cataloguing and collection practices as well
            as metadata standards for translations to develop a replicable workflow for their extraction so that researchers
            can use the (in)visibility of translations in various national collections to their advantage in curating and
            analyzing bibliographic translation datasets.
        
        
          Identifying Translation in Online Library Catalogues
          The information that indicates whether a given edition is in fact a translation is not always in the same place
            in the online library catalogues, and it can be difficult to differentiate a translation from an original
            edition. The main challenge here is that, when it comes to a library collection or online catalogue, a
            translation is treated as another edition of a publication. Translations thus do not form a distinct category, as
            do genres or topics. Additionally, in most collections, it is not possible to trace a translation back to its
            originalIndeed, this information tends to be omitted in printed versions of books as well, making it
            difficult to know with which edition of a book a given translator worked with when producing their
            translation.. The information on languages and translators is also not contained in the same fields across
            library catalogues. This is one of the central challenges in identifying and extracting bibliographic data on
            translations in national libraries. We hence need to ask: how can we discern translations from other catalogue
            entries, and can we formulate a rule that allows us to identify and extract translations across different library
            collections? In this section, we exemplify differences in cataloguing practices by looking at three national
            library online catalogues — the BAnQ, the ÖNB, and the DNB — explore the challenges they present, and propose
            solutions for extracting bibliographic translation data.
          Let us begin by looking at a couple of examples of translations in these three online library catalogues as
            presented to any user searching for a translation. What indicates that this is a translation and where can this
            information be found? We will be using Patrick Süskind’s bestselling novel Das
            Parfum, which has been translated into numerous languages, as an example.
          
            Online catalogue entry for the English translation of Patrick Süskind’s novel Das
              Parfum in the DNB. Source: https://d-nb.info/972310142,
              accessed September 28, 2023.
            
          
          When looking up the English translation of Süskind’s Das Parfum in the DNB online
            catalogue, we can immediately see the fields indicating the edition’s language in addition to the original
            language. As Figure 2 shows, besides the translator in the Titel (title)
            field and the original title in the Werk(e) (works) field, the DNB online catalogue has a Sprache
            (language) field that includes the original language (an excellent indicator for our definition of translation).
            This mandatory field is really simple to work with, since we may easily formulate a rule for it — a translation
            is any edition that has an Originalsprache(n), (original languages), next to the language of the edition.
            The language field in the DNB follows ISO conventions for languages and is therefore consistent across all
            entries, with a standardized format. Thus, even though a separate field or category for translation does not
            exist in the online catalogue, as is the case for the BAnQ, it is possible to distinguish a translation by the
            language field. For comparison, let us look at the BAnQ and ONB and see if they also keep a language field, to
            which we could theoretically apply the same rule for identifying translations.
          
            Online catalogue entry for the English translation of Patrick Süskind’s novel Das
              Parfum in the BAnQ. Source: https://cap.banq.qc.ca/notice?id=p%3A%3Ausmarcdef_0005023128&queryId=a9346d7f-a400-44a1-80dc-4209dd91e582&posInSet=8,
              accessed September 28, 2023.
            
          
          When searching the BAnQ’s online catalogue for Süskind’s Perfume, there are
            indications that we are dealing with a translated work in the Title field, which contains the translator’s
            name, and in the Preferred Title field, which contains the edition’s language but not the original
            language. Besides the indicator translated by, there is no separate category that distinguishes this
            edition as a translation from an original edition. Additionally, the Content field contains the
            categorical descriptor Romans allemands – 20e siècle (German novels – 20th century), which stresses the
            importance of categorizing editions according to their national literature in the BAnQ. This can also be an
            indicator of translation, albeit on an implied basis. It is important to note that there is no other field in the
            online catalogue containing the original language or title, which, as the next example shows, is also the case
            for the ÖNBThe same is the case for the Library and Archives Canada online catalogue, which does not
            include the original title or an additional language field for the original language. See https://bac-lac.on.worldcat.org/oclc/59166116,
            accessed August 23, 2023..
          
            Online catalogue entry for the French translation of Franz Kafka’s novel Die
              Verwandlund in the ÖNB. Source: http://data.onb.ac.at/rec/AC04061926, accessed September 28, 2023.
            
          
          Unlike the DNB but similarly to the BAnQ, the ÖNB online catalogue does not have a field for a work’s original
            language in its online catalogue. Some indicators that this edition is a translation can be found in the field
            Weitere Beteiligte (additional participants), which includes the ÜbersetzerIn (translator), and the
            field Verantwort.angabe, (responsible entity), which includes the note Trad. de (translated by).
            Again, there is no separate field for translation as its own category. If we wanted to identify all translations
            of Kafka, we would have to look for any edition that either has a translator in the Weitere Beteiligte
            field or search for all the different variations of the phrase Trad. de in each language — for English we
            had Trans. or translated from in the examples above. In either case, formulating a rule based on
            these fields is challenging and has a larger error margin due to the numerous variations. Going by language
            field, as for the DNB online catalogue, seems much more feasible.
          What these examples of translations in various online catalogues — all revelatory of the general trend to
            invisibilize translations — illustrate are the plethora of cataloguing practices at work in each libraryIn
            addition, a certain level of expertise is required to successfully query the online catalogues for translations,
            a difficulty that was pointed out by Borgman as early as 1996. Currently, most query languages do not contain an
            option to only display translations since, as our examples show, translations are not visibly categorized as
            such.. How, then, can we utilize the metadata and especially the language fields to propose a solution for
            identifying translations in these different libraries despite their overall invisibility in these catalogues?
        
        
          Extracting Translations from Libraries: A Replicable Method Using the Language Fields in MARC Records
          For a formalized, replicable method of extraction of translation metadata from library collections, we may
            formulate a rule based on the language field, according to a linguistic definition of translation —
            presuming that the translated edition has a different original language than the current
            editionSmith-Yoshimura proposed to identify translations by using the author/title field in the
            bibliographic data from WorldCat in combination with Wikidata to establish whether it exists in another language.
            If it was the case, it could be classified as a translation .. To
            extract translations from the DNB, we can write a query that finds any edition with both an original and other
            language listed. In the catalogue, this appears as Originalsprache(n), which is included only for
            translations, while Sprache is used to indicate the given edition’s languageA similar definition has
            also been used for extracting data from the Biblioteca Nacional de Espana .. A search for the original language (spo) in the DNB, spo=gerFor ISO language
            codes see: https://www.dnb.de/DE/Service/Hilfe/Katalog/kataloghilfeExpertensuche_node.html#doc193268bodyText2,
            accessed August 23, 2023., for instance, yields all titles that originally appeared in German. We can
            hence apply this rule with high confidence that it will yield only translationsFor a quality assessment of
            the resulting data extracted from the DNB using this query see Teichmann 2022, 60–65.. The question
            remains if the same rule can be applied to the other library catalogues, such as the ÖNB and the BAnQ, even in
            the absence of an original language field in their online catalogues.
          Metadata standards are a precondition for applying this (and other) rule(s) across catalogues and extracting
            large quantities of bibliographic translation data for analysis. The catalogues in question hence need to contain
            a language field. In the online catalogues, this field is only visible for the DNB, but not for the ÖNB and BAnQ.
            However, since all these catalogues follow the same standards for bibliographic metadata in a fixed MARC or MARC
            21 format, we can therefore utilize the MARC 21 fields and operationalize the search query to extract
            translations. How do the fields containing the original language (which are specific to DNB and do not appear in
            BAnQ or ÖNB catalogues) translate to MARC 21 as a standard format? Let us have a look at our Süskind translation,
            extracted in MARC 21 from the DNB:
          
          
            MARC 21 record of the English translation of Patrick Süskind’s Das Parfum from
              the DNB, https://d-nb.info/972310142, accessed September 28,
              2023. In this example, line 7 and lines 27–36 are highlighted
            
<record xmlns="http://www.loc.gov/MARC21/slim" type="Bibliographic">
  <leader>00000nam a2200000 c 4500</leader>
  <controlfield tag="001">972310142</controlfield>
  <controlfield tag="003">DE-101</controlfield>
  <controlfield tag="005">20171203165742.0</controlfield>
  <controlfield tag="007">tu</controlfield>
  <controlfield tag="008">040924s2001    xxu||||| |||| 00||||eng  </controlfield>
  <datafield tag="015" ind1=" " ind2=" ">
    <subfield code="a">04,A44,1706</subfield>
    <subfield code="2">dnb</subfield>
  </datafield>
  <datafield tag="016" ind1="7" ind2=" ">
    <subfield code="2">DE-101</subfield>
    <subfield code="a">972310142</subfield>
  </datafield>
  <datafield tag="020" ind1=" " ind2=" ">
    <subfield code="a">0375725849</subfield>
    <subfield code="c">kart.</subfield>
    <subfield code="9">0-375-72584-9</subfield>
  </datafield>
  <datafield tag="035" ind1=" " ind2=" ">
    <subfield code="a">(DE-599)DNB972310142</subfield>
  </datafield>
  <datafield tag="035" ind1=" " ind2=" ">
    <subfield code="a">(OCoLC)76513721</subfield>
  </datafield>
  <datafield tag="040" ind1=" " ind2=" ">
    <subfield code="a">1140</subfield>
    <subfield code="b">ger</subfield>
    <subfield code="c">DE-101</subfield>
    <subfield code="d">9999</subfield>
  </datafield>
  <datafield tag="041" ind1=" " ind2=" ">
    <subfield code="a">eng</subfield>
    <subfield code="h">ger</subfield>
  </datafield>
...
</record>
          
          There are several mandatory fields in MARC 21 for language. Controlfield 008, for
            instance, contains the language of the edition (the record in Figure 2 contains "eng" in the language field). Additionally, we have three more fields that contain
            information on the languages: 
            field 040 subfield b Cataloguing Source / Language of
              Cataloguing
            field 041 Language Code
            field 041 subfield h Original Language
            For the Süskind record above, field 041 contains "eng" or the language of the edition, while field 041 subfield h, more
            importantly, contains the original language ("ger"). This is the field that has been
            made visible in the online catalogue of the DNB. Hence, using the information in MARC 21 field 041 subfield h, we could apply our rule and query the catalogue for any entries that have German
            ("ger") as an original language under the assumption that these are translations.
            Indeed, according to OCLC standards, field 041 subfield h is required (if
            applicable) and hence should include original language of a translation The same
            applies to ExLibris, who provide services to most European national libraries. .
            Additionally, there is the option to add information on whether the edition is a translation as a first indicator
            (see the value of ind1 for field 041). If this
            translation indication is set to ind1="1" then, according to OCLC standards, the work is or includes a translation and is used regardless of whether the work in the original
            language has been published . As we can see in Example
            1, however, the first indicator for field 041 is left blank, which suggests
            that the indicator (which categorizes the edition as a translation) is not consistently used in some libraries’
            metadata.
          Nevertheless, even without the first indicator, the information on original and edition language in the field 041 (language) is a consistent and reliable source of information to identify and
            extract the editions that are translations. Since field 041 is required according
            to OCLC standards and according to the ÖNB’s documentation, these (sub)fields’ metadata should be
            includedSee OBV Wiki. 041 Sprachcode. https://wiki.obvsg.at/Katalogisierungshandbuch/Kategorienuebersicht041FE, accessed April 18, 2024..
            We can now test whether our filter based on language can be applied to other library collections for identifying
            translations. Let us retrieve the MARC file for the French Kafka translation in the ÖNB catalogue we mentioned
            aboveWhile the DNB online catalogue provides the option to export any record in MARC 21 to the user, for
            the ÖNB catalogue this is only possible by using a Python code or manually, by first looking up the Metadata
            Management System ID (MMS-ID), the AC-Nummer, or the barcode and adding it to a custom link: https://obv-at-oenb.alma.exlibrisgroup.com/view/sru/43ACC_ONB :
          
          
            MARC 21 record for the French translation of Franz Kafka’s Die Verwandlung
              from the ÖNB, https://obv-at-oenb.alma.exlibrisgroup.com/view/sru/43ACC_ONB?version=1.2&query=alma.local_control_field_009=AC04061926&operation=searchRetrieve,
              accessed September 28, 2023. In this example, lines 7–10 are highlighted.
             
<datafield ind1=" " ind2=" " tag="040">
  <subfield code="a">ONB</subfield>
  <subfield code="b">ger</subfield>
  <subfield code="d">ONB</subfield>
  <subfield code="e">rakwb</subfield>
</datafield>
<datafield ind1=" " ind2=" " tag="041">
  <subfield code="a">fre</subfield>
  <subfield code="h">ger</subfield>
</datafield>
<datafield ind1=" " ind2=" " tag="044">
  <subfield code="c">XA-FR</subfield>
</datafield>
<datafield ind1="1" ind2=" " tag="100">
  <subfield code="a">Kafka, Franz</subfield>
  <subfield code="d">1883-1924</subfield>
  <subfield code="0">(DE-588)118559230</subfield>
  <subfield code="4">aut</subfield>
</datafield>
<datafield ind1="1" ind2="0" tag="240">
  <subfield code="a"><<Die>> Verwandlung</subfield>
  <subfield code="l">franz.</subfield>
</datafield>
<datafield ind1="1" ind2="0" tag="245">
  <subfield code="a"><<La>> métamorphose</subfield>
  <subfield code="c">Franz Kafka. Lecture accompagnée par Dorian Astor. Trad. de Claude David</subfield>
</datafield>
<datafield ind1=" " ind2="1" tag="264">
  <subfield code="a">Paris</subfield>
  <subfield code="b">Gallimard</subfield>
  <subfield code="c">2004</subfield>
</datafield>
<datafield ind1=" " ind2=" " tag="300">
  <subfield code="a">173 S.</subfield>
  <subfield code="b">Ill.</subfield>
</datafield> 
          
          As we can see in Example 2, the ÖNB uses field 041
            and subfield h for translation, but not the first indicator. Again, this confirms that
            our rule based on original language to extract translations can be applied not only to the DNB, but also the ÖNB,
            despite apparent differences in their visible online catalogues. This formalized method can thus be used across
            different libraries to filter translations, offering a solution to the invisibility and inconsistency challenges
            researchers face. However, the practice of including only the information from the bibliographic data on original
            language and not the first indicator that would categorize the edition as a translation (even though it is so
            valuable and important for translation researchers) highlights the marginal status of translations in our
            cultural institutions, a fact even more apparent in collection practices.
        
        
          Availability and Accessibility of Library Translation Data
          Now that we have established that we can utilize the metadata standards and the language fields to identify
            translations, we also need to establish whether and to what extent libraries even collect translations. As the
            astute reader will have noticed, the last example for cataloguing practices mentioned above is not Süskind’s
            Perfume, but Franz Kafka’s La métamorphose. Indeed, the
            ÖNB’s catalogue does not contain any translations by Süskind, because the library does not collect them in the
            first place See https://search.onb.ac.at/permalink/f/sb7jht/ONB_alma21252938780003338, accessed August 23, 2023..
            When approaching a library to obtain bibliographic data, we oftentimes need to contact the responsible librarians
            and ask not only whether they collect translation data but when and how much. As the ÖNB catalogue illustrates,
            not all libraries collect translations to the same extent and in the same manner. When we contacted the ÖNB to
            ask whether they collect translations, they confirmed that they only do so to a very limited extentFor budgetary and space reasons, only a selection of translations is collected[...] An exception is
            made in the case of fine literature [schöne Literatur]. Here the ÖNB endeavours
            to acquire all available translations of Austrian works (without multiple editions) in the greatest possible
            completeness. OBV Wiki. ONB Sammelrichtlinien. March 2018, 15. https://www.onb.ac.at/fileadmin/content/onb-dateien/PDF_Download/Sammelrichtlinien_Maerz_2018.pdf,
            accessed April 18 2024.. Indeed, in addition to cataloguing practices, collection practices condition the
            (in)visibility of translations. This brings us to our second challenge: just as the representation of the
            bibliographic data varies for each catalogue, so too do data availability and accessibility. Collection practices
            — the rate, amount, and type of publications that are collected by national libraries — are by no means
            standardized, a problem that also affects data availabilityA discussion of the influence of WorldCat on the
            national library’s collection policies of translation lies beyond the scope of this study. The DNB shares
            bibliographic data with WorldCat, however, to what extent that applies to translations has yet to be
            investigated. As looking at the DNB, the ONB, and the BAnQ suggest, the collection practices are first and
            foremost tied to their deposit regulations and not to enriching their catalogue with data from WorldCat. However,
            these national libraries may still share their data with WorldCat, for which case I argue that documenting
            collection and cataloguing practices on a national level can reveal the ways these
            large-scale discovery systems are built . How often, how many
            records, and which records are shared by national libraries with global databases such as OCLC or VIAF has yet to
            be studied.. Not all national libraries collect translations or editions published outside of their
            national boundaries, due to budget and resource constraints, for instance. Depending on a national library’s
            priorities, users, resources, and staff, translations may or may not be collected. Coming back to Belantara and
            Bradinski, when working on bibliographic data we need to remind ourselves that [m]etadata
            reflects a compromise between what the cataloguer knows about an item and the existing system into which she is
            bound to embed it . Hence, whether and how translations are
            catalogued and collected is not only due to the cataloguers at work, but also the institutional policies,
            standards, and practices. This subsection is thus dedicated to the collection practices in the institutional
            system and the resulting availability and accessibility of bibliographic translation data.
          From the examples of the online catalogues above, we can get a sense of which national libraries collect
            translations and which do not, or more precisely which authors they collect — the ÖNB did not have translations
            of Süskind, but of Kafka. While this may be conditioned by a library’s target readerbase, it comes down to the
            library’s collection policy. The DNB, for instance, has a legal deposit regulation (Pflichtablieferungsverordnung
            or PflAV) that includes translations. It therefore collects all publications issued in
            Germany, irrespective of their language, and media works published abroad for which
            a publisher or a person who has a legal domicile, business premises or their principal residence in Germany has
            sold (licensed) the right to publish the work abroad (emphasis ours)⁠ need to be
            deposited at the DNB. The latter specifically includes translations published outside of Germany.All translations from the German language are collected. We receive most of these as mandatory
            deposits. Other publications are acquired by donation, exchange or purchase. 
          In comparison, the ÖNB’s deposit regulation is applicable to works published in or relevant to Austria
            (Auslandsaustriaca) Aus budgetären und
            platztechnischen Gründen werden Übersetzungen nur in Auswahl gesammelt.[...] Eine Ausnahme wird bei der Schönen
            Literatur gemacht. Hier bemüht sich die ÖNB alle erreichbaren Übersetzungen von österreichischen Werken (ohne
            Mehrfachauflagen) in größtmöglicher Vollständigkeit anzuschaffen. [Due to budget and spatial limitations,
            only a selection of translations is collected, with the exception of belles
            lettres (Schöne Literatur). For these works, the ÖNB endeavors to acquire all available translations of
            Austrian works (without multiple editions) in the greatest possible completeness.] , which explains why the translation of Süskind’s Perfume is missing from their online catalogue. While
            the DNB and ÖNB’s deposit regulations are geographically defined,Or rather nationally. the
            BAnQ predominantly collects works in French and, on occasion, in English published outside of QuébecSee
            5.3 Langue des ressources documentaires [5.3 Languages of ressources] in the Politique de développement de la Collection universelle [Policy for
            the development of the universal collection]: [La] BAnQ acquiert et
            rend accessibles d’importantes collections en français. Dans une moindre mesure, BAnQ acquiert et rend
            accessibles des ressources documentaires en anglais et dans d’autres langues en usage au Québec, en fonction des
            besoins de ses clientèles. [ The BAnQ acquires and provides access to important
            collections in French. To a limited extent, the BAnQ also acquires and gives access to documents in English and
            other languages which are used in Québec, based on the needs of its clients.]  In
            comparison, the Library and Archives of Canada collect any publications on a selective basis that are of interest
            to Canada, which may reach beyond the national boundaries (see https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/l-7.7/page-1.html, accessed August 23, 2023).. However,
            which authors’ translations are collected may depend on many factors, including readership. Again, translations
            do not explicitly appear in any of the lists of works collected, which underlines their invisibility and the
            challenges in establishing whether a library collects translations published outside of their official languages
            or geographic borders. A collection policy or deposit regulation that explicitly reaches beyond the linguistic
            and geographic borders is a good indicator of whether a library collects translations.
          Finally, data accessibility may vary for each library and lead to severe usage restrictions. Not all libraries
            give free access to their data. For instance, even though MARC 21 is also a metadata standard in Canadian
            libraries , the Library and Archives of Canada's online catalogue only provide access to
            MARC records for their employeesThe LAC-BAC however provides batch access to MARC records for each year.
            See: MARC 21 records: 2023. https://library-archives.canada.ca/eng/services/services-libraries/cataloguing/bibliographic-records/2023/Pages/2023.aspx,
            accessed July 4 2024. Similarly, the BAnQ does not provide any access to its MARC records, and information
            on how to access these data is difficult to find. These differences between the Germanophone national libraries
            and the Canadian libraries highlight the last major challenge we will discuss in this section for extracting
            bibliographic translation data from libraries arising from institutional practices: data accessibility. As Table 3 illustrates, access to data ranges from accessible and extractable in various
            formats (DNB) to limited access (BAnQ):
          
            Comparison of data use licenses, extraction tools, and accessibility to data for the DNB, ÖNB, and BAnQ
              online catalogues.
            
              
              DNBFor the DNB see: 
              ONB
              BAnQ
            
            
              Accessibility
              Open access
              Open access
              Not open access
            
            
              Data extraction
                (via the online catalogue)
              Extraction in batches in MARC, CSV, PDF formats
              Individually in Excel, RIS, and other formats
              Individually in Excel, RIS, and other formats
            
            
              License
              CC0 1.0 Universal (CC0 1.0)
                Public Domain Dedication
              CC0 1.0 Universal (CC0 1.0)
                Public Domain Dedication
              Closed license, no sharing, no data publication
            
          
          Compared to the ÖNB and BAnQ, the DNB gives the most access to its bibliographic data, allowing users to freely
            extract the data directly from the online catalogue in large batches and various formats, and to re-publish their
            data under a universal license. Their Datenshop online portal allows registered users to query the online
            catalogue by original language, for instance, and to save their selection and extract it. This makes
            bibliographic data from the DNB accessible and easy to find, extract, and publish. For comparison, the ÖNB does
            not have any such option, and records can only be individually, manually selected and extracted from the online
            catalogue. For extraction in batches with specific search queries, the ÖNB offers an SRU (Search/Retrieve via
            URL) and an OAI-PMH (Open Archives Initiative Protocol) service for extracting data in MARCXML (MARC data in an
            XML environment). Additionally, a Gitlab repositoryhttps://labs.onb.ac.at/gitlab/labs-team/catalogue/-/tree/master/sru. needs to be consulted for the
            respective Python scripts, which adds an additional hurdle to data accessibility for user groups who may not have
            Python coding skills​​https://labs.onb.ac.at/gitlab/labs-team..The ÖNB has the same license as the DNB for their
            metadata, a Creative Commons Zero (CC0, No rights reserved).
          The BAnQ is the least accessible in terms of their bibliographic data. While they do supply some summary
            statistics on the BAnQ’s new acquisitions, full bibliographic records can only be obtained on a case-by-case
            basis by communicating directly with the institution. As preliminary data exploration of their collections has
            shown , the sharing of data for publication is not allowed. Comparing the DNB
            and ÖNB to the BAnQ clearly highlights the differences in availability and accessibility as well as the
            difficulties researchers face when trying to establish whether translation data is available to them and whether
            they can freely use and publish them.
        
      

        Next Steps: Toward a Snapshot Repository Documenting Collection Practices
        Coming back to our initial argument, collection and cataloguing practices give a good indication of the status of
          translations in the respective institutions and their practices as well as their agency in rendering this
          information accessible and available to the public. An open data policy, a legal deposit regulation that extends
          beyond linguistic and geographic boundaries, as well as close collaboration with the libraries are conditional for
          working with bibliographic translation data.
        One of the next steps toward a big translation history is to make visible not only translations but also the
          libraries’ respective collection practices. In this section we therefore propose a replicable workflow — using the
          query by original language in MARC records — that allows us to extract data at different points in time to build a
          snapshot repository of the catalogue. Preliminary work  on extracting
          translations of German fiction in 2021 and 2023 from the German National Library has highlighted that titles are
          retroactively being added for previous years, especially between 1980 and 1990 (see Figure
          5):
        
          Snapshots of translations of German fiction in the DNB library extracted in 2021 and 2019 
          
        
        Re-extracting the data with the same query at a later point in time allows us to observe how, when, and to what
          extent translations are collected over time. Additionally, it would be of value to operationalize and test the rule
          for extraction by original language on different catalogues and to compare the catalogued translations by looking
          at where they overlap or differ. In this way, the underlying institutional practices that contribute to the
          invisibility of translations can be made visible.
        Making translations across library catalogues (as well as cataloguing and collection practices, accessibility, and
          availability) visible and developing tools and datasets for doing so is thus a crucial endeavour to open up these
          rich resources and build the infrastructure for future studies in quantitative translation research. In alignment
          with the main research focus of critical archival studies, one may ask what role libraries play in the
          dissemination and collection of translations, what status translations have in a given literary culture, the
          international canonization of national canons, and most importantly the institutional practices that contribute to
          translation (in)visibility.
      

        Conclusion
        As demonstrated in the documented case studies of Germanophone and Francophone national library collections and
          the Canadian literary press, translation invisibility is just as present in institutional and cultural standards as
          in the textual features of many translations and their paratexts. Indeed, our survey of the Canadian literary press
          as well as the German, Austrian, and Québécois national libraries’ cataloguing and collecting standards has
          revealed a tendency to marginalize translations. In library catalogues, translation is not its own category,
          translators and original editions are not consistently identified across languages, while some institutions forgo
          the collection of translated material altogether. What is more, these trends persist despite the presence of
          translation-specific and language fields in the metadata underlying library records. Similarly, reviewing standards
          in the Canadian literary press — specifically literary journals publishing reviews of translated literature — often
          do not account for the specific bibliographic information required to identify translations in the header and body
          of reviews. As a result, researchers face many challenges when assembling corpora of bibliographic data pertaining
          to translations drawn from these resources, mainly due to difficulties in identifying which books are translations
          in the first place.
        Despite the prevalence of what we have called translation invisibility in library catalogues and
          collections as well as in the literary press, we propose a number of solutions for data extraction and
          interpretation that future researchers can employ to overcome and use this invisibility to their advantage. In
          particular, we suggest that researchers rely on the predominantly linguistic definition of translation in use by
          libraries and utilize the language fields contained in MARC records to retrieve translations from library
          catalogues with a high degree of precisionFor example, in a subset of 552 translated titles extracted from
          the DNB for the year 2020, only three were identified as false positives (non-translations), which accounts for the
          high precision and efficacy of the extraction method .. We also
          encourage translation researchers to collaborate with librarians to understand and document collection practices
          over time. Additionally, bibliographic data should be extracted at various points in time in order to illustrate
          translation collection and cataloguing practices at different points throughout the duration of the research. When
          dealing with the literary press, we urge researchers to employ mixed methods, creating large datasets to
          quantitatively showcase translation (in)visibility within given publications on a large scale and at many levels,
          but following up with close readings of reviews themselves, which tend to nuance these preliminary impressions.
          Such qualitative analyses reveal the context-specific agents and motivations behind predominant trends that make
          translations invisible, which vary widely as we have seen.
        Additionally, factors such as publishing standards, a Eurocentric market, and illegitimate translations also
          result in translation marginalization outside the institutional and cultural trends we have discussed. Market
          reports such as the Literature Across Frontiers are mainly available for the European
          and North American markets, where copyright is more readily enforced. They thus do not account for the countless
          unauthorized translations in circulation — these included pirated books, fan-translated media, and illegal
          translations of censored content   . Finally, the institutional standards of the literary press and national libraries are intimately enmeshed with
          those enforced by the publishing industry and (inter)national copyright policies. The challenges we discuss here
          are but one element of a larger network of cultural attitudes that affect the accessibility and availability of
          translation data and therefore the diversity of DH research on translation.
        Overall, we wish to sensitize digital humanists and translation scholars alike to the multiple facets of
          translation invisibility at work in quantitative and data-based studies of translated sources. While the apparent
          textual invisibility of the translator has been well documented in translation studies, the relatively recent
          accessibility of bibliographic data has not yet led to many reflections on the data-related aspects of translation
          invisibility. We hope that the challenges, solutions, and interpretative strategies proposed in this article will
          be of use to future researchers harnessing these data sources. Additionally, we hope the multidisciplinary nature
          of DH will increase the visibility of translations in other fields — including literature, information science, and
          archival studies — leading scholars to consider these institutional and cultural aspects of translation
          cataloguing, collection, and reviewing practices and to import them into their respective disciplines.
      
