Title:  Reviving Classical Drama: virtual reality and
                    experiential learning in a traditional classroom
Volume:  012
Issue:  3
Date:  19 November 2018
Abstract:  
                
                 Over the past decades the advancement of technology and its subsequent
                    introduction to the humanities has led to the development of several
                    applications that enhance study and research in areas such as Classics,
                    archaeology, epigraphy, and linguistics. The focus of digital humanists and
                    other humanities scholars has turned to the efficient storage of information
                    that facilitates search, comparative studies, accessibility, and consequently
                    research. The common point of reference for the aforementioned applications is
                    that they do not involve the need for the scholar to
                        physically be in a virtual space. In areas, such as
                    archaeology and epigraphy, the creation of projects that provide access to 3D
                    models of the artifacts as well as to virtual replications of ancient sites has
                    resulted in the opening of new areas of research and reconsideration of
                    traditional research issues. Also,  argue that digital
                    visualizations may make the ancient world more accessible to a larger audience.
                    One may comprehend the structure of a vase and analyze its artistic patterns by
                    zooming and relighting it. A problem that is yet to be considered, though, is
                    how a scholar and a student are to perceive Classical drama, the theatrical
                    space, the distances between the actors, the chorus, and the audience, the
                    logistics of the performance, and the cultural aspects at play. This paper
                    discusses the importance of experiential learning and the use of virtual reality
                    as a means of promoting traditional edification methods, virtually recreating
                    the actuality of the stage, and presents the Magic Mirror Theater, a web
                    application designed to facilitate the study of Classical drama.
            
Full Body Text: 


                Introduction
                Over the past decades the advancement of technology and its subsequent
                    introduction to the humanities has led to the development of several
                    applications that enhance study and research in disciplines such as Classics,
                    History, English, and Linguistics. The focus of digital humanists and other
                    humanities scholars has turned to the efficient storage of information that
                    facilitates search, comparative studies, accessibility, and consequently
                    research. The common point of reference for the aforementioned fields is that
                    they do not involve the need for the scholar to physically
                    be in a virtual place. On the other hand, in areas, such as archaeology and
                    epigraphy, the creation of projects that provide access to 3D models of the
                    artifacts as well as to virtual replications of ancient sites has resulted in
                    the opening of new areas of research and reconsideration of traditional research
                    methods as well as questions. For an overview of applications in Digital
                        Classics and Archaeology, see .
                     argue that such digital visualizations may make the
                    ancient world more accessible to a larger audience. A problem that is yet to be
                    considered, though, is how a scholar and a student are to perceive Classical
                    drama, the theatrical place, the distances between the actors, the chorus, and
                    the audience, the logistics of the performance, and the cultural aspects at
                    play. This paper discusses the importance of experiential learning and the use
                    of mixed reality as a means of promoting traditional edification methods,
                    virtually recreating the actuality of the stage, and presents the Magic Mirror
                    Theater, a web application designed to facilitate the understanding of Classical
                    drama.
                There have been several attempts at reviving the circumstances of performance in
                    the actual physical place. Studies have focused on information that is provided
                    to us through the texts, inscriptional evidence as well as archaeological and
                    spatial constituents. Walton in his 1989 collection of essays titled Living Greek Theater: A Handbook of Classical Performance and
                        Modern Production furnishes the reader with information on classical
                    performance and then re-conceptualizes it on the contemporary stage, while
                    discussing staging issues. Mary-Kay Gamel through the Ajax project in 2011, one
                    of the most recent attempts at restaging Classical drama, reconstructed Ajax, modernized the setting, and reshaped the
                    characters to imbue them with modernity while retaining the classical aura.
                    David Gowen  presents a brief overview of the Archive
                    of Performances of Greek and Roman Drama at the University of Oxford. Helene
                    Foley 
                     has developed profoundly insightful studies into the
                    reconstruction of performances. Richard Beacham 
                    reviews various projects in the reconstruction and study of ancient theaters
                    through virtual reconstructions. Scholarly interest in the reconstruction
                        of the ancient world, including synaesthetic prototyping, has also
                        developed. See  for an analysis to recreate the
                        sonic circumstances in the Roman amphitheater. Several of these
                    studies are enveloped within a concept of contemporization of drama and
                    contextualization within modern society.  discusses
                    Greek drama on the American stage.  expands the
                    parameters and studies the socio-political forces that drive modern
                    reconstructions, and  discusses a performance of
                        Trojan Women on the American stage against a
                    contemporary backdrop. The above brief survey indicates that unlike other
                    literary genres, Classical drama requires a two-pronged approach — a theoretical
                    one that encompasses literary and socio-political attributes of the plays and a
                    dramaturgical one that is meant to comprehend the practical aspects of works
                    that were meant to be performed and not simply read. Therefore, when one teaches
                    Classical drama, the literary analyses overshadow a pivotal aspect of those
                    works. Bibliographical surveys of modern performances, even though they start
                    from the dramaturgical premise, provide the readers with a different yet still
                    literary discussion of a performance, with the reader missing the dramatic
                    component. Furthermore, digital reconstructions of ancient venues and/or
                    performances forego a vital constituent that is the individual and his/her sense
                    of space. Therefore, it seems that the only all-inclusive solution that will
                    lend itself to traditional courses is the creation of a mixed-reality
                    environment, which will allow the user to be in the
                    theatrical space, experience the performance, and attempt different staging
                    possibilities in a more realistic manner, incorporating enhanced synaesthetic
                    approaches and constituting for the participant the foundation of constructivist
                    learning that can only be achieved through experiential learning practices.
            

                Experiential Learning
                The advantages of experiential learning were apprehended very early on. Dewey, an
                    American philosopher, psychologist, and educational reformer in the late
                    19th–early 20th century, first suggested and implemented the paradigm of
                    effective teaching that combines traditional methodologies with real-life
                    experiences so as to achieve the most effective and truly pedagogical
                    experiences. He first tested this reconsideration of traditional teaching in his
                    experimental Laboratory School in Chicago and in 1896 published his book The School and Society in which he explicates his
                    rationale, methods, methodology, and the practical results.
                         19 also describes simulation as a process
                        through which one "learns through
                            a grammar of doing and being. For discussions on experiential
                        learning, see  and . According to Dewey, experiential learning is developed by and
                    based on the following three unities:
                        
                        the unity of abstract knowledge and doing in the real world
                        the unity of action and reflection and
                        the unity of the individual with the community
                    
                 The aforementioned three aspects of experiential learning are on par with the
                    precepts of digital humanities theories and pedagogy. 3D immersive and
                        interactive teaching precepts have of course been implemented in several
                        STEM areas. For more information, see  More
                    specifically, there is a concatenated reality of the interwoven existence of
                    knowledge, the individual, the environment (which could either be further
                    knowledge or other people), and finally the overarching reality of perception of
                    all the above that has prompted the birth of digital humanities. Therefore,
                    since this initial appreciation of experiential learning by Dewey, there have
                    been extensive studies on the pivotal role of digital pedagogy that may include
                    teaching of new technologies or digital critical thinking to reconsider
                    traditional research questions .  assembled a voluminous work on digital humanities
                    pedagogy that aims at (re)defining pedagogy. The contributors argue that new
                    technologies, digital interactions with traditional research topics, and the
                    collaborative spirit of such trajectories enhance critical thinking that only
                    stems from new technologies but is not dependent upon them.  presents the Ph.D. in Digital Humanities as
                        not just a framework for
                        research…but is itself empirical research into the best framework with which
                        to further develop the intellectual culture of digital humanities.
                     contend that: Skills training is not research training, as
                        the knowledge gained is
                        transient.
                    Thinking skills are the most important
                        because they are the most deeply embedded and the most transferable.
                     explores the same ideas of applying new technologies,
                    but also of reinforcing traditional methods through the lens of digital
                    methodologies. In the areas of classical studies, the significance of teaching
                    via digital methods and against the backdrop of digital methodologies is
                    extensively discussed in . Finally, in a broader
                    sense but against that same backdrop of new media and its relation with the
                    user,  discusses visual and media cultures and the
                    ways in which reality and illusion are (re)created as well as their contact with
                    and influence of the viewer and vice versa. 
            

                Experiencing Classical Drama
                Based on the aforementioned attempts at theatrical recreation as well as the
                    undeniable advantages of experiential learning, what is the principal component
                    lacking in traditional teaching and research of Classical drama? What are the
                    inherent characteristics of theatrical performances that cannot be captured via
                    traditional readings, recitations, or class performances?
                Scholars and students of classical studies very early familiarize themselves with
                    the technical knowledge regarding, for instance, the number of actors (2-3 male
                    actors), the members of the chorus (12-15 in tragic plays, 24 in comic plays),
                    the fact that orchestras traditionally were circular (with the exception of the
                    theater of Thorikos, where it is rectangular), and the diameter of the orchestra
                    in the theater of Epidaurus (20m). However, how feasible is it for them to apply
                    this knowledge to the real world, and, more specifically, is it possible to
                    truly comprehend the movements of the limited number of actors when they need to
                    leave the stage, change costumes in order to impersonate another character, and
                    then return while the chorus is singing for 150 lines? Also, can modern
                    audiences really understand the performance of female roles by male actors?
                    Finally, is the overall perception of ancient productions possible when one is
                    not given the opportunity to actually walk in the theater, feel the connection,
                    both physical and dramatic, between actors and audience, and also
                        experience the performance in its actual natural
                        surroundings? For a discussion of virtual reality in performing arts,
                        see . Several scholars have explored similar
                        issues, regarding the significance of virtual reality and the preponderance
                        of a multi-sensory study and comprehension of ancient venues and activities.
                        See ; ; ; ; .
                Theater is the space par excellence that
                    necessitates and effectuates the confluence of several parameters — stage as a
                    construction, people both as actors and viewers, and the cultural ambience of
                    the play itself as well as of the time when the performance takes place. Absence
                    of any of the above not only sullies the equilibrium, but also denotes utter
                    failure of the endeavor. The place, the individual as an actor or viewer within
                    that place, and the cultural context within which plays were written and
                    performed in the ancient world need to be recaptured so as to acquire a
                    historical, cultural, and theatrical situatedness, thus procuring a notional
                    space for the theatrical performance. 3D models of theatrical venues can easily
                    be constructed, and individuals who reenact plays can also act within any place.
                    So arguably the missing component is the intangible, namely the co-existence of
                    space and actors as well as the cultural aura. Virtual reality and the creation
                    of immersive virtual worlds can effectuate tangibility of what thus far has been
                    considered intangible cultural heritage. See 
                        for a discussion of the representation of tangible and intangible heritage
                        in serious games applications. Therefore, as theater presents a
                    unique concatenation of tangible cultural heritage — theatrical construction —
                    and intangible cultural heritage — the plays, the actors, and the props — the
                    only feasible way to re-experience all the above as participants ourselves is
                    the creation of a mixed-reality virtual environment.
                         100-103 discusses the meaning of cultural
                        presence and the importance of immersion in a virtual environment. 
                
                Thus far the research community has attempted to fill the vacuum with the
                    production of historical games, the emergence of which alone is enough to prove
                    the exigency for the recreation of past worlds if we are to achieve a more
                    profound level of understanding. The creation of experiences  and the sense of place  are
                    the two pivotal pillars of understanding lacking in traditional historical
                    studies.  discuss extensively the nascent area of
                    historical game studies within the context of serious gaming applications.
                        See also ; ; . They argue in favor of the theory, content,
                    and purposes that such games serve that distinguish them from generalized game
                    studies.  and  also
                    extensively analyze this developing field, envisioning reconsideration in the
                    approaches of history. A basic point of historical gamification, however, is
                    that, albeit carrier of historical and cultural relatability for the players, it
                    is not meant to insist on historical accuracy. For extensive discussions
                        on various aspects of game and historical game studies, see also , , , , , .
                     also discuss the improved perception of
                    situatedness in 3D digital game-based learning, but admit to its limitations
                    regarding accuracy. See also the discussion by .
            

                Virtual and Mixed Reality
                Gamification of history seems to be an obvious response to the need to envision
                    yourself as a participant in a historical event, therefore better comprehending
                    the cultural and socio-political issues at play. Virtual worlds constitute
                    exactly this (digital) space — the place, the ambience, and the people.
                        For the differentiation between space and place, see , where the two notions are described
                        as follows: …place=space +
                            meaning…Place is situated within a larger setting or space, and it
                            cannot be understood in isolation of meaning…
                     describes a virtual world as an electronic environment that
                        visually mimics complex physical spaces, where people can interact with each
                        other and with virtual objects, and where people are represented by animated
                        characters.
                    Second Life is a representative example of the
                    freedom of the individual to experience something else, beyond each one’s
                    contemporaneity.
                This section furnishes a survey of virtual reality applications that attempt to
                    minimize the lack of physical contact between their field of study and the
                    individual user and then proceeds to discuss the enhanced reality(ies) available
                    through mixed-reality environments. Recent advances in computer graphics
                    technology have made the use of virtual reality and/or experiential-learning
                    methods in projects on classical studies possible. These projects can be divided
                    into three main categories: a) projects that involve the development of 3D
                    virtual models of ancient objects, b) simulations of 3D virtual environments,
                    and c) experiential-learning systems. All three categories of projects have
                    added significantly to the promotion of classical research. For
                        discussions of virtual archaeology, see ; ; ; ; ; . 
                
                    3D models of ancient sites and objects
                    The Rome reborn project (http://www.romereborn.virginia.edu) is an international
                        initiative whose goal is the creation of 3D digital models that illustrate
                        the urban development of Ancient Rome from the first settlement to the early
                        Middle Ages. The project started in 1997 and is an ongoing collaboration
                        between the Virtual World Heritage Laboratory at the University of Virginia,
                        the UCLA Experiential Technology Center, and many other European institutes.
                        The online published version of the project consists of medium quality
                        rendered still images and videos of the 3D models. 
                    The Digital Roman Forum project (http://dlib.etc.ucla.edu/projects/Forum) of the former UCLA
                        Cultural Virtual Reality Laboratory produced the 3D digital model of the
                        Roman Forum as it appeared in late antiquity. The project started in 1997
                        and was completed in 2003. The produced 3D models were included in the
                            Rome reborn project. The online published
                        version of the project consists of rendered still images (in small, medium,
                        and high quality) and panorama videos of the 3D models. The reconstruction
                        was based on literary evidence.
                    The UCLA Experiential Technology Center (http://etc.ucla.edu) continues the work of the former UCLA
                        Cultural Virtual Reality Laboratory and has designed several 3D digital
                        models of archaeological sites in Bolivia (Island of the sun), Egypt
                        (Lighthouse of Alexandria, Karnak), Israel (Qumran), Italy (Colosseum,
                        Basilica Maxentius, Villa of the papyri, and others), Spain (Cathedral of
                        Santiago de Compostela), and Turkey (Digital Anatolia). The projects focus
                        on the study of the architectural and urban design of the aforementioned
                        sites. 
                    The Digital Egypt for Universities project (http://www.casa.ucl.ac.uk/digital_egypt/3d/) is an on-line
                        library of 3D models from several archaeological sites in Egypt developed at
                        the University College London. The 3D models were created between 2000-2003
                        and are available on-line in 3D file format VRML. Rendered images and videos
                        of the 3D models are also available on-line. 
                    The Ashes2Art initiative (http://www.coastal.edu/ashes2art/) at the Coastal Carolina
                        University focuses on the development of educational interactive digital
                        media presentations of Alexandria, Delphi, and Renaissance Florence. The
                        interactive presentations include photographic material, text, and 3D
                        models. The projects were the results of a collaboration between Alexandria
                        University and Arkansas University and are available on-line in the form of
                        interactive Java applets. This project was in part funded by the NEH.
                
                
                    Simulations of 3D virtual environments
                    Researchers from the NYU Media Research Lab and the UCLA Computer Science
                        department have developed a research application that populates 3D
                        reconstructed models of archaeological sites with autonomous virtual
                        avatars. The goal of this project is to quantitatively analyze and
                        understand the human activities and the use of the spaces in the Great
                        Temple of Petra, Jordan. The results of this project are available here:
                            http://www.cs.ucla.edu/~dt/papers/iva06/iva06.pdf
                    Computer simulation of ancient sailing was the focus of an interdisciplinary
                        project at the University of Calgary in 1999. The goal of this project was
                        to understand the strengths and limitations of ancient transportation means.
                            http://www.cnrs-scrn.org/northern_mariner/vol09/nm_9_2_11-22.pdf
                    
                        Virtual Vaudeville is a virtual 3D
                        reconstruction of a Victorian theater, a live performance simulation system
                        that provides a sequence of 3D computer animations. http://www.virtualvaudeville.com/
                    
                
                
                    Interactive environments for experiential learning
                    An interactive gaming environment is used in the project titled History simulation for teaching early modern British
                            history at the University of South Carolina. The project's main
                        goal is to develop a game-based classroom technology that can be used in
                        general as a prototype for educational games. The educational content is
                        gradually presented to the users by solving game challenges. 
                    Second Life is an interactive virtual
                        environment that has been used by many academic institutes as a platform for
                        embodied experiential learning. Professors and students of law have designed
                        a digital model of a virtual court building to practice law, using Second
                        Life as a classroom software application. There are similar experiential
                        learning uses of Second Life reported in other academic fields. The Second
                        Life Educational Directory lists all academic institutes that use this tool
                            (http://wiki.secondlife.com/wiki/Second_Life_Education_Directory). 
                    Additionally, there have been consistent attempts to visualize the text
                        differently — reconsidering its linearity (https://twinery.org/), visualizing
                        theatrical texts , or simply producing an
                        experience beyond reading the text (; ; ; ). 
                    The development of the aforementioned projects clearly indicates that
                        academic communities consider it necessary to enhance traditional research
                        and teaching methodologies and that virtual reality can play a significant
                        role in this endeavor. However, it is obvious that the existing projects are
                        limited either by the modality of the content or by the delivery mechanism
                        of the educational material. Additionally, they all lack the synaesthetic
                        parameter that can actually grant a degree of reality and understanding that
                        can be afforded through the stimulation of more senses than vision.
                             in the edited volume on sensory archaeology
                            explores sensory studies into Roman culture. More specifically,
                        the majority does not provide the 3D models to the users, thus limiting
                        their interaction to predefined viewing angles (still images), or
                        pre-recorded videos. Flynn actually criticizes the lifelessness of
                        3D-digitized virtual replicas of places and artifacts and proceeds with an
                        extensive discussion on the lack of embodiment that results in lack of
                        understanding . Therefore, an
                        advanced solution to this limitation that would also enhance the perception
                        of the theatrical space is the creation of a mixed reality , a virtual world that would also allow for the
                        embodied participation of the users. 
                    Experiential learning is a well-studied research area, and the connection
                        between embodied action and learning outcome has been extensively examined
                            (; ; ; ; ). See  for an extensive discussion on virtual
                            reality’s interaction with education. Several researchers have
                        emphasized the contribution of embodiment to learning and the apprehension
                        of concepts (; ;
                            ; ). Additionally, there is strong
                        scholarship in different academic fields to support that mixed-reality
                        environments enhance the educational experiences, leading to better learning
                        outcomes.  discuss extensively the advantages
                        of mixed reality and present guidelines as to how this is to be achieved
                        within a learning environment. 
                    The Magic Mirror Theater project implements state-of-the-art technologies for
                        experiential learning, using virtual reality and natural user interaction.
                        The answer to practical issues and questions that tantalize the scholar and
                        the student of Classical drama can be approached and perhaps answered via
                        the design of this mixed-reality environment in which the users can view
                        themselves as tridimensional avatars, play, act and react, practice their
                        knowledge in a given topic, learn through their mistakes, and achieve a
                        fundamental comprehension of their object of study. For applications
                            of virtual reality in education, see  and
                                . The project essentially transforms
                        the computer screen into a mirror where the users can
                        see themselves acting inside the 3D models of ancient theaters and
                        interacting with virtual objects, using intuitive natural gestures. Within
                        these parameters, the Magic Mirror Theater utilizes the human cognitive
                        ability that is enhanced when the body interacts with the environment.
                            See  and . This is particularly vital when the object of study actually
                        involves not only abstract notions that can be better conceptualized within
                        a mixed-reality environment but also an actual physical place, as is the
                        case with theatrical performances of ancient dramas. Second the project
                        creates what Colella calls participatory simulations, also a paragon in understanding via
                        constructivist learning . 
                     The concept behind this pilot prototype technique is to open the discussions
                        on Classical drama and move them beyond the text. The Magic Mirror Theater
                        is not meant to replace actual performances in the physical space. However,
                        when limited by a semester-long curriculum, one finds herself resorting to
                        mundane PowerPoint presentations and suggestive readings as well as
                        theoretical performance possibilities. The presented pilot technique aims at
                        offering the possibilities to students to virtually situate themselves into
                        an ancient venue, observe the natural surroundings, and
                            experience the feeling of moving and interacting in
                        a setting that takes them beyond the regular classroom. 
                
            

                Embodied Experiential Learning and the Magic Mirror Theater
                
                    
                        Starting form this gaze that is, as
                            it were, directed toward me, from the ground of this virtual space that
                            is of the other side of the glass, I come back toward myself; I begin
                            again to direct my eyes toward myself and to reconstruct myself and to
                            reconstitute myself there where I am.
                        
                    
                
                 argue: If physical movement primes mental
                        constructs, such as language, then it may be that increasing an individual’s
                        repertoire of conceptually grounded physical movement will provide fertile
                        areas from which new knowledge structures can be developed.
                    Researchers exploring these potentials have undertaken various environments of
                    mixed realities.  discuss the use of robotics.  experimented with body-based metaphors in which the
                    students assumed the role of an asteroid to better conceive movement into space.
                    Other types of virtual interaction have involved the creation of panoramas, as
                        it (the panorama) reveals
                        itself as a navigable space, persistent throughout media history, which is
                        charged with sociocultural implications.
                     and 
                    argue that: In virtual reality, the
                        panoramic view is joined by sensorimotor exploration of an image space that
                        gives the impression of a living environment.
                     discuss extensively the advantages of immersive
                    virtual worlds and their effect in pedagogy against the backdrop of
                    constructivist learning and the opportunities for participatory and social
                    learning through fostered interactions between users. 
                The Magic Mirror Theater is a technologically advanced educational tool for the
                    effective and comprehensive study of Classical drama. The program involves the
                    3D digitization of ancient theaters as well as other objects for theatrical
                    performance (such as replicas of props, costumes, and mechanical devices).
                         contends that experiential learning is
                        inextricably linked to reality, tangiality, and virtuality. An
                    embodied environment for experiential learning and an intuitive natural user
                    interface were developed that allow the users to interact with the system and
                    the virtual objects using natural body motion and gestures. The users can walk
                    in life-size replicas of Classical theaters, interact with virtual objects,
                    using virtual-reality technology, and ultimately understand the circumstances of
                    performance in the Greco-Roman world. 
                 Thus far, teaching methodologies for Classical drama in higher education have
                    been limited to the study of the plot from the original text in conjunction with
                    secondary bibliography that provides information regarding the circumstances of
                    performance based on archaeological and literary evidence. This method of
                    studying and analysis of the text, however, has left gaps in knowledge and room
                    for subjective, or even incorrect interpretations, especially when
                    spatiotemporal interactions of the portrayed characters play a significant role
                    in the study of the original text. Questions such as How many dancers in
                        circular arrangement can fit on the stage of the theater of Dionysus in
                        Athens?
                    What are the possible arrangements of the chorus on ancient theaters with
                        rectangular stage?
                    How much time does it take to walk from the center of the stage to the back
                        stage in the theater of Epidaurus?
                    What would be the appropriate size of props, costume accessories, and other
                        machinery so as to be visible to everyone in the audience, including people
                        in the back rows? cannot be easily answered by the traditional teaching
                    methodologies in the humanities. To find the answers to such questions, one
                    needs to combine archaeological, historical, topographical knowledge, and
                    possibly to visit the archaeological sites in order to understand the size of
                    the available spaces as well as the physical environment and its implicit role
                    in the play.
                         discusses extensively the modern perception of
                        movement in Roman pantomime through kinaesthetic approaches.
                 In this prototype technique the synergy of mixed reality, embodiment, and the
                    users’ own avatars is achieved so that the level of understanding is effectively
                    increased. More specifically, the conception of place can be grasped as the user
                    gets to be the avatar walking in the tridimensional space, and the usage of
                    props enhances the apprehension of historical situatedness, as the users can
                    navigate a space imbued with images and the culture of the past. Admittedly this
                    is a component that is still lacking in games. 
                    states that: There could never be an
                            objective simulation free from
                            bias. Computer programs, like all texts, will
                        always be ideological constructions. Similarly  maintains that: Place is neither an imprint of our discursive
                        regimes nor an impervious container that shapes our identities without being
                        shaped in return. Rather, place is the product and the producer of a dynamic
                        fusion of sign system, physical reality and interpretant. So the
                    Magic Mirror Theater system intends to utilize the above parameters rather than
                    consider them reductive by immersing the user as an avatar into the exact
                    replicas of ancient theaters, thus procuring a conceptually productive
                    co-existence of user, actual physical environment, and theatrical venue.
                The classroom projector or computer screen can be used as a magic mirror in which
                    the users can see themselves standing in the middle of a virtual theater, which
                    is a real-life digital replica of the well-known ancient theater of Epidaurus.
                    This mixed-reality system utilizes a low-cost depth/video camera, which is
                    connected with the computer as a regular USB web-camera. Such depth cameras are
                    available from many companies that produce devices for natural user interaction,
                    such as gaming engines (Microsoft Kinect), peripheral devices (LeapMotion),
                    laptops (Intel RealSense camera), and many others starting from $69 (retail
                        price). For a discussion on such devices and full-body learning, see
                            . One of the key
                    advantages of these devices is that they do not require any technological skill
                    by the users. On the contrary, the users can use their natural body motion and
                    everyday life gestures to give instructions to the computer. Scholars and
                    students are found to be familiar with natural user interface platforms that
                    already exist in the majority of households due to their affordable price range,
                    according to national reports . This prototype system
                    uses the information acquired from the depth sensor to instantly reconstruct the
                    3D body image of the user, which is displayed as a real-time 3D holographic
                    video stream in the middle of the virtual theater. The camera follows the motion
                    of the users, who can move, walk, act, dance as the corresponding motion is
                    instantly transferred to their 3D holographic image in the virtual scene. The
                    prototype system was built as an HTML5 application using webGL for the rendering
                    of the 3D content (avatars and theater) and webSockets for communicating in
                    real-time with the depth sensor. The depth sensor tracked in real time the body
                    motion of the users by fitting a 25-joint skeletal model to their 3D silhouette
                    using the J4K (Java for Kinect) library that was originally developed for
                    real-time 3D body reconstruction and human avatar synthesis . The real-time sequence of tracked skeletons was
                    transferred to the prototype system that displayed composed 3D scene. 
                 The users can intuitively understand the size of the stage and the structure of
                    the theater by simply walking in the virtual space and by visually comparing the
                    size of their holographic body with the size of the depicted virtual elements of
                    the theater, which is an automatic process of our brain that is triggered any
                    time one visits a new space . The users can also
                    choose between 1st and 3rd person’s view, hold virtual props, and replicate their body
                    multiple times in the virtual space in various arrangements. The latter is a
                    useful feature, as it facilitates the understanding of those parts that involve
                    the members of the chorus (dancers), whose number varies across authors and
                    plays. The Magic Mirror Theater educational system covers cross-disciplinary
                    material on Classical drama, and its implementation is based on archaeological
                    evidence on the number of actors and choristers, their gender restrictions
                    (actors in Classical Greece were exclusively male), the theater in which it was
                    originally performed, the season and time of the performance (relative to the
                    sunrise or the sunset), the structure of the theater (type, size, auxiliary
                    rooms available, etc.), as well as information about costumes and mechanical
                    devices used during the performances. The material is presented to the users
                    through an experiential-learning environment that can be used either by the
                    instructor as a novel teaching tool, or by the scholar of Classical drama who
                    will ultimately understand better the circumstances of performance in the
                    Greco-Roman world by personally interacting with the aforementioned virtual
                    objects. The ultimate goal is to recreate not only the place itself but the
                    ambience of that place as well. 
                Champion and Dave have discussed the possibilities of new technologies that
                    achieve 
                        visual fidelity,
                        
                     but not enough to recreate the place with its atmosphere and emphasize on
                    the need for 
                        a more advanced representation
                            of such places (that) may include their contextual settings (e.g.
                            landscapes) and the ability to navigate through them
                        
                    .  in their discussion on 3D digital
                    game-based learning admit that: Determining which types of
                        perspective are amenable to the instructional goals and virtual
                        representations of literary and historical 3D-DGBL is perhaps the most
                        difficult task facing designers. Creating a more subjective experience by
                        collapsing the distance between the real and the virtual, the Self and the
                        Other, through a first-person point of view emphasizes the transparent
                        immediacy of the game space. The Magic Mirror Theater enables you to
                    find yourself in the virtual environment and be in a position to decide which is
                    the role that the Self wishes to assume, while also embedding the Self in the
                    space of the Other.
            

                The Magic Mirror Theater prototype environment
                
                    
                    A screenshot
                
                
                    
                    A screenshot
                
                Screenshots of the prototype Magic Mirror Theater mixed-reality system for
                    experiential learning. The classroom projector or computer screen is transformed
                    into a magic mirror in which the users can see themselves standing in a virtual
                    environment (the corresponding images from the real environment are shown in the
                    lower right corner of each image). The images show the user walking in the
                    environment, interacting with virtual objects, and wearing virtual costumes.
                    Note that these virtual objects and clothing do not exist in the real
                    environment (shown at the lower right corner of figures
                        1 and 2).
                
                    Image below: Screenshots of the early prototype of
                    the proposed educational software. The software runs as a web application and
                    does not require additional installation. The screenshots show the digital model
                    of the ancient theater of Epidaurus from different perspectives (figure 3). The instructor can control the
                    synchronized motion of the chorus shown in figure
                        4, or act in the middle of the stage (figure
                        5). Depending on the type of play, different virtual costumes and
                    props will be available as well as different preconfigured arrangements of
                    virtual actors on the stage. The merits of experiential learning can be
                    demonstrated by comparing how easily the users can understand the physical size
                    of the theater when they walk in the space. I would like to
                    emphasize that all these images were screen captured from the continuous (25
                    frames per second) visual output of the mixed-reality program. 
                
                    
                    A screenshot
                
                
                    
                    A screenshot
                
                
                    
                    A screenshot
                
            

                Experimental Results
                In this section I present the results of a preliminary user testing that was
                    performed in order to quantitatively evaluate the prototype software as an
                    educational tool. The user testing was performed with the students of an
                    undergraduate Greek Drama class (CLT 3291) at the University of Florida in the
                    Fall of 2013 in the regular classroom environment, in which a Kinect sensor was
                    installed and the Magic Mirror Theater software was projected using the
                    classroom’s projector. The number of students who participated in this study was
                    25. Although the sample size of this preliminary test was limited, and therefore
                    its results are not conclusive, they clearly indicate a notable increase in the
                    students' level of comprehension. Furthermore, in order to further objectify
                    these inferences, the initial experiments were conducted on quantifiable
                    questions pertaining to the size and space of the ancient theater of Epidaurus. 
                 The experiment was designed using photographs and a 3D model of the ancient
                    theater of Epidaurus. The goal of the experiment was to test whether the
                    students understand better the tridimensional structure of the theater using
                    traditional teaching methodologies, such as photographs in a slideshow, or using
                    the prototype interactive software. The first fundamental element of
                    tridimensional topology that one could test is the perception of the scale,
                    which was the key question in the test, and was also used as a metric for
                    quantitative analysis. In general, the perception of the scale is associated
                    with the human ability to compare the size of an unknown object with the size of
                    a known reference, such as our own body. This relative comparison generates the
                    perception of scale. In order to avoid any potential biasing related to the
                    missing of a scale reference, the experiment was designed in such a way so that
                    both modalities (i.e. the 2D images and the 3D interactive scene) had the same
                    reference of scale, which was achieved by the presence of human bodies in both
                    modalities.
                The following pictures show three examples of 2D images that were shown to the
                    students. The slide show also contained architectural floor plans of the
                    theater. 
                        
                        Photograph of a Classical theater
                    
                    
                        
                        Drawing of a Classical theater
                    
                    
                        
                        Photograph of a Classical theater from another angle
                    
                
                The first question was to estimate the diameter of the orchestra (the circular
                    stage). This question was given to the students before the slide show, so that
                    they would concentrate on the elements of the pictures that could help them
                    understand the scale. After the end of the slide show, the students submitted
                    their answers individually. It should be noted that none of the students knew
                    the correct answer before the experiment.
                After that, the students were asked to use the proposed mixed-reality system, and
                        walk in the middle of the stage of the 3D model of the
                    ancient theater. The students had this experience individually, and then they
                    were asked to estimate again the diameter of the orchestra based on their
                    mixed-reality experience. Finally, the students were asked to choose which of
                    the two modalities was more informative in terms of determining the scale. The
                    possible answers to this question were: a) the 2D images, b) the 3D prototype
                    system, and c) they were equally informative.
                The histogram of responses to the first two questions is plotted below. 
                        
                        A histogram
                    
                A quick observation based on the above histogram is that the responses obtained
                    using the proposed system were less scattered compared to the responses from the
                    2D image slide show, which suggests that the 3D interactive system increased the
                    certainty of the students' responses. Furthermore, a larger concentration of
                    responses around the ground truth (i.e. the correct answer, which is 66 feet) is
                    observed in the case of the proposed system, which suggests that the 3D
                    interactive space was more informative compared to the traditional teaching
                    technology. These observations also agree with the quantitative evaluation that
                    was performed in the collected data samples and is presented below. 
                        
                        A line graph
                    
                A Normal (Gaussian) probability was fit to the data of each survey using the
                    robust gaussfit tool in the mathematical software Matlab. This tool
                    computes the mean of the fitted probability model as well as the standard
                    deviation (spread). The mean corresponds to the average response to each
                    question and is depicted in the above plot as a vertical line (dotted line for
                    the 2D slideshow case and dashed line for the 3D interactive system case). By
                    observing the results, it is clear that the average response in the case of the
                    proposed system is twice as close to the correct answer compared to the
                    responses from the 2D slide show. This improvement is quantitatively evaluated
                    using three different metrics: a) absolute mean error, b) absolute median error,
                    and c) standard deviation, which corresponds to the certainty, and the results
                    are presented in the following table. 
                
                    Quantitative Evaluation of the Improvement in Students'
                        Understanding
                    
                        
                        Slide-show Lecture
                        Proposed Method
                         Improvement
                    
                    
                        Absolute Mean Error
                        12.96 feet
                        6.60 feet
                        49.08%
                    
                    
                        Absolute Median Error
                        6 feet
                        4 feet
                        33.33%
                    
                    
                        Standard Deviation
                        51.73 feet
                        27.31 feet
                        47.20%
                    
                
                The results presented in the above table suggest
                    that there was a 30%-50% improvement in the students' understanding of the space
                    using the proposed system. Although these results are not conclusive because
                    they were obtained using a small sample size, they clearly suggest an
                    improvement in the students’ perception and understanding of the space. 
                Finally, 70% of the students reported that the proposed system was more
                    informative in terms of understanding the scale. The remaining 30% of the
                    students reported that the two modalities were equally informative regarding the
                    scale. However, several students from this category indicated that still the
                    proposed system was more informative with respect to the spatial relationship of
                    the theater with the surrounding environment and other surrounding structures. 
                
                    Survey on which method the students understand better the scale
                    
                        
                        Slide-show Lecture
                        No Difference Noted
                        Proposed Method
                    
                    
                        % of responses
                        0%
                        30%
                        70%
                    
                
            

                Future Directions and Conclusion
                In this paper the Magic Mirror Theater was presented, a web application designed
                    to facilitate the study of Classical drama. The merits of experiential learning
                    and virtual reality clearly suggest that in areas of research, such as
                    archaeology and theater, spatiotemporal information is crucial for our
                    comprehension. The Magic Mirror Theater enables the users to virtually
                        find themselves in ancient theatrical venues,
                    experience the scale, perform, use props, and ultimately be able to reconstruct
                    the circumstances of performance in the Classical world. 
                In the future, an extended fully functioning version of this project as an HTML5
                    open-source software will be published. Furthermore, the project will be
                    developed to include more theatrical venues from the ancient world so that the
                    users may have the possibility to choose. The project will be enhanced by the
                    addition of masks, attire, and other props and stage material, which the users
                    will be able to select and appear to be holding on the screen. A fully
                    functioning version of the project with the aforementioned features will allow
                    further user testing using more complex hypotheses that will assess the
                    long-term learning curve of the students as a semester-long experience and
                    assessment, which is the primary future goal of this project. Finally, more
                    advanced modalities will be incorporated, including the option to select the
                    position of the user’s avatar in the theater as well as the usage of more than
                    one depth sensor that will allow for more users, hence actors.
                 The scope of this project is to recreate to the highest degree possible ancient
                    performances of Classical drama within their original space. The potential of
                    such an undertaking would be to afford the users the opportunity to participate
                    and better grasp the socio-cultural dynamics at play. As Weckström phrased it: 
                        Only where the environment
                            itself shapes and is shaped by interaction that is informed by
                            appropriate and extensive social and cultural learning can we begin to
                            say that it is a world
                        
                    . 
            
