Title:  The Unnamed Fugitive and the Unknown Maroon: Anonymity and the Limits of Repair 
               in Black Atlantic Historical Recovery
Volume:  019
Issue:  1
Date:  28 April 2025
Abstract:  
           In this paper, I examine the ethics and pedagogical implications of unnaming for the political project of 
              historical recovery. Digital humanities projects on slavery often proffer the reparative promise of serving as 
              public-facing works that seek to recover enslaved people's lives from archival erasure. I contend that by entwining 
              the immaterial digital commemoration of The Unnamed Fugitive with the material monument to Le Marron Inconnu, my 
              students' interpretive choices illuminate the ways that deliberate unnaming can enact a shift away from anonymity 
              and erasure and, in turn, a move towards productive engagement with the limits of knowledge and recovery in 
              slavery's archive.
           
         
Full Body Text: 

          
          
            "I thought I could put my troubled mind to rest if I knew just one of 
               their names."
            – Celia Naylor, Unsilencing Slavery: Telling Truths 
               About Rose Hall Plantation, Jamaica, pp. 159
          
            In the summer of 1837, an incident in international waters set off an exchange of urgent 
               letters between the French Consul in Denmark, the French Naval Ministry, and 
               the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Paris . 
               An enslaved man had been found aboard the Neptune, a ship 
               traveling from Martinique to the port of Le Havre. Presumably 
               discovered as the vessel neared or reached Helsingør, a coastal town north 
               of Copenhagen, the fugitive now appeared to be held on board by the captain 
               as the vessel continued en route to Le Havre. What was to be done with the 
               stowaway? Did his case for manumission come under Danish jurisdiction or rather fall 
               under French law? Did he even have a case for manumission, having fled 
               Martinique without his enslaver's accord? As the French Minister of the 
               Navy explained to his colleagues, various legislative measures, including the law of 
               March 4, 1831, and the Royal Ordinance of April 29, 1836, laid out the conditions by 
               which an enslaved person could travel from the colonies to the metropole. The ability to 
               claim freedom upon arrival in France, he wrote, was only applicable if the 
               enslaved person had been sent to France lawfully by his enslaver 
               . On his part, the Neptune's 
               captain was adamant that he would return the fugitive to his enslaver at the first 
               opportunity on his next voyage to Martinique 
               . If by stowing away on the ship, the fugitive had 
               hoped to avail himself of the promise of liberty espoused by the Freedom Principle, that 
               hope now seemed illusory as the Neptune sailed onward to 
               France.The French Freedom Principle, that is, the 
               tenet that any slave who sets foot on French soil becomes free 
               , has been examined in detail by 
               , , and 
               . On the adoption and adaptation of free soil in 
               Haiti, see for example . On French colonial 
               regimes' distinction of metropolitan free soil from overseas colonial territory, see 
               . For an examination of the largely inconsistent application 
               of the Freedom Principle in other Atlantic locales from the medieval period to the 19th 
               century, see Peabody and Grinberg's 2011 special issue of 
               Slavery & Abolition (32.2). The 
               Neptune's fugitive presented a legal conundrum for 
               authorities in the 19th century. When undergraduate students at the University of 
               Michigan encountered records of the fugitive's flight in the fall of 2021, they 
               faced a different kind of conundrum, namely how to identify the fugitive and piece 
               together his story. As students soon discovered, throughout the letters exchanged about 
               the fugitive, he was never once named.
            
            My students came to the scant paper trail of the fugitive's flight as part of their 
               coursework for Mapping the French Atlantic. Housed in the 
               Department of Romance Languages and Literatures, Mapping the French 
               Atlantic was a French course supported by a 2018 Technology Services New 
               Initiatives/New Instruction Grant in the College of Literature, Science, and the Arts at 
               the University of Michigan. The grant aimed to foster inclusive teaching 
               practices that made innovative use of technology and was awarded to fund two primary 
               expenses required for Mapping the French Atlantic. The first 
               was to engage the services of Agile Humanities Agency, a software, design, and consulting 
               collective, to create a digital map of the movement of enslaved people in the 
               Atlantic world. The second expense was travel to archives in Fort 
               de-France, Port-au-Prince, Montreal, and New York 
               City to digitize records about enslaved people that would serve as primary sources 
               from which students would gather the information required to populate the digital map.
            
            Mapping the French Atlantic sits somewhere at the 
               intersection of digital humanities (DH), history, and literary studies. Its objective was 
               to use digital mapping methods to retrace the movements of enslaved people throughout the 
               Atlantic world as they navigated slavery, freedom, and citizenship in the 
               18th and 19th centuries. In so doing, the course aimed to guide students in a critical 
               reflection on how maps shape our understanding of the world and on what mapping movement 
               might reveal about the relationship between mobility and power.On pedagogy and 
               teaching the history of slavery in the French speaking world, see 
               . Course readings ranged from novels to 
               theoretical texts to primary sources that allowed students to engage with these questions. 
               Sue Peabody's There are No Slaves in France: The 
               Political Culture of Race and Slavery in the Ancien Régime (1996) and 
               Madeleine's Children: Family, Freedom, Secrets, and Lies in France's 
               Indian Ocean Colonies (2017) provided important social and legal context needed 
               to understand the terms of Black people's mobility in the French Atlantic. 
               These texts showed how laws such as the 1777 Police 
               des noirs and the later laws evoked by the Minister of the Navy in his 
               correspondence about the Neptune's fugitive constrained 
               movement and in the process made Blackness synonymous with enslavement. Michel-Rolph 
               Trouillot's Silencing the Past: Power and the Production of 
               History (1991) and Maryse Condé's Moi, Tituba 
               sorcière…noire de Salem (1981) offered rich material for thinking about how to 
               tell other kinds of stories about enslaved people in ways that are cognizant of archival 
               lacunae and that nonetheless work to recover narratives of their lives. Finally, articles 
               by Caroline Séveno and Camille Lefebvre and Isabelle 
               Surun laid out the politics of maps and their use in colonial conquest in 
               Africa, while writings by Britt Rusert and Lauren F. 
               Klein explored the ethics and stakes of digitally rendering Black lives 
                 
                . The goal of our discussions of 
               these readings over two-thirds of the semester was to lay the intellectual groundwork for 
               students' final projects.
            
            The final project itself consisted of only a few lines that amount to barely a paragraph. 
               This length constraint, necessitated by the small size of the tooltip that accompanies 
               each geographic point on the digital map, required my students to work with an economy of 
               words. And so, in the final third of the semester, students were assigned to small groups 
               of three or four. Each group was allocated a dossier pertaining to an enslaved person that 
               contained all the records I could find about that person's life in my travels to archives 
               in the Caribbean, the United States, and France. 
               Working in their small groups, students extracted all the geographical data they could 
               find and used it to plot the person's trajectory on the digital map. But, as many scholars 
               have shown, data extraction on its own can hardly tell a true, complete, or just story 
               about the lives of people who were often reduced to numbers in ledgers or criminals in 
               court records.See, for example, , 
               , , 
               and . Students were therefore also required to sit 
               with these documents and work out for themselves — with guidance from our course texts — 
               how they might tell the person's story otherwise. The result, for each group, was a short 
               biographical narrative that introduces and contextualizes each person's trajectory on the 
               map.
            
            Ultimately, the course Mapping the French Atlantic and the 
               resulting digital visualization, Mapping Marronage, were 
               projects in recovery. Their aim was to recover what fragments we could of enslaved 
               people's lives, piece them together into a narrative — biographies that for many of the 
               people we studied would never be written otherwise — and in the process, learn something 
               about how people who were enslaved or lived in proximity to slavery articulated ideas 
               about freedom and belonging through movement. In the first iteration of the course in 
               2018, students huddled in small groups around screens in the computer lab as they entered 
               their data into the map, and we watched in collective amazement and pride as 
               Mapping Marronage 
               (www.mappingmarronage.com) went live 
               with the stories and movements of the first six people whose journeys were charted on the 
               map: Armelle Conan, the enslaved woman who bore the children of royal 
               botanist Jean-Baptiste-Christophe Fusée-Aublet; Edouard Calabar, 
               who like the Neptune's stowaway was enslaved in 
               Martinique, but unlike the fugitive, managed to lay claim to freedom in 
               France via the Ordinance of April 29, 1836; Joseph Bologne, 
               Chevalier de Saint-Georges, who was born to an enslaved woman and whose classical music 
               prowess has gained increasing recognition in recent decades; Marie-Joseph 
               Angélique, who was tried and executed for an alleged act of arson that set 
               Montreal ablaze; Charles-Pierre Lambert and his descendants, 
               whose musical talents reverberated across New Orleans, France, 
               Brazil, and Portugal; and Pierre Toussaint, who 
               began life in slavery in Saint Domingue and later became hairdresser to 
               New York City's elite in the 19th century.
            
            In the second iteration of the course in 2021, when the COVID-19 pandemic made huddling 
               around a shared computer screen a veritable health hazard, and with protests after the 
               police murders of Breonna Taylor and George Floyd lending a new 
               sense of urgency to our discussions, students found community and solidarity by 
               collaborating online to tell the stories of a new group of enslaved people. One of these 
               was the stowaway discovered aboard the Neptune.I am 
               immensely grateful to my students Ellie Tabb, Chloe Wendlandt, 
               and Kurt Wigent for their hard work in mapping the flight of the 
               Neptune's fugitive. Yet, as students worked to salvage 
               biographical details to visually present the story of the enslaved man's origins, capture, 
               flight, and discovery on the digital map, they found that for all they would never know 
               about their subject, his anonymity proved to be the most fundamental obstacle of all.
            
            It is rare to find scholarly work on the transatlantic slave trade and slavery that does 
               not include the now-familiar lament about gaps and silences in the archives. Scant 
               documents, partial records, and deliberate distortions attest to the far-reaching 
               violence that the institution of slavery unleashed on those in bondage and continues to 
               enact on their descendants.See, for example, , 
               , , , 
               , and . Despite embarking 
               on the Mapping Marronage project with this anticipation of 
               archival lacunae, the absence of the Neptune fugitive's name 
               was more debilitating for our work than we expected. From the very inception of 
               Mapping Marronage, it was clear that we could not design a 
               website that would require two mandatory name fields for data entry, as the practice of 
               slavery in the Americas often involved denying enslaved people a surname in 
               order to transform them more completely into property, to sever them from community, and 
               to render genealogy and lineage impossible.On slavery, Black genealogy, and the 
               brick wall, see , , 
               , and . On a technical and 
               practical level, the fugitive's anonymity meant that we had no data to enter into the 
               mandatory name field that the software required to create an entry on the digital map. 
               Without at least one name to identify the man, we could not move forward. My students and 
               I considered several acts of substitution to fill in this gap presented by the documented 
               disregard for the enslaved fugitive. As we brainstormed offering up an African name or 
               naming him Neptune, after the ship on which he made his escape from 
               Martinique, it became clear that the quandary presented by the fugitive's 
               anonymity went beyond the technical problem of data entry. Would these alternatives 
               suffice for our project? What exactly was our project?
            
            In trying to heed Jessica Marie Johnson's call to infuse 
               [our] work with a methodology and praxis that centers the descendants of the enslaved, 
               grapples with the uncomfortable, messy, and unquantifiable, I remain uncertain 
               that Mapping Marronage is able to refuse 
               disposability . For this reason, and somewhat 
               against the grain of argumentation and thesis, this article reaches for the modest goal of 
               simply documenting a process: the attempt to write a biography of an anonymous person. I 
               interweave my documentation with a survey of digital projects that use the language of 
               recovery in their engagement with slavery in order to think through the stakes of 
               Mapping Marronage. Drawing on Aisha Finch, I use 
               recovery in this context to designate an ethos, a capacious range of 
               ideas, practices, and embodiments that collectively seek to redress or restore the 
               loss wrought by chattel slavery, if not of human lives then, at least of our knowledge about 
               those lives now . In this non-exhaustive assemblage of 
               digital projects, recovery names various things from filling in archival lacunae to 
               telling stories that deliberately run counter to the official record, from restitution to 
               restoration to repair.
            
            Helton et al. note that historical recovery is an urgent political imperative 
               as recovering the histories of Africans in the Americas 
               originally emerged as an abolitionist tool in the nineteenth century and would remain 
               inextricable from black freedom struggles well into the twentieth century. They 
               argue too that the violence of Atlantic slavery was so great, and 
               the limits of its archive so absolute, that no amount of historical recovery could 
               properly describe it, let alone begin to undo its damage 
               . Were we then to acquiesce to the anonymity to 
               which the historical records had consigned the Neptune's 
               clandestine passenger? At the same time, what can be recovered of and for someone who 
               cannot even be named? The fugitive's namelessness complicated our ideas about recovery as 
               a straightforward act of writing back into archival gaps and silences, 
               a consoling filling in of blank spaces, a giving voice to the 
               long-muted subjects of history . By 
               locating my students' attempt to tell the story of the anonymous stowaway at the site of 
               a generative tension between the imperative of recovery and its impossibility, this 
               reflection examines how anonymity brings us to the limits of historical recovery, as well 
               as how those limits might suggest other ways of unmapping enslaved people's mobility.
            
        

          Recovery
            Mapping Marronage is an interactive visualization of the 
               transatlantic networks that enslaved people created in the 18th and 19th centuries. 
               Marronage, as conceptualized in this project, takes as its point of departure the core 
               definition of the word in Black Atlantic history to mean the process of removing oneself 
               from slavery.  surveys the wide-ranging scholarship that 
               has considered marronage from various angles, including examining women's experiences of 
               fugitivity and complicating the grand marronage/petit marronage binary. 
                in turn derives the theory freedom as 
               marronage by paying close attention to enslaved people's flight, and in their 
               co-authored article,  examine Black placemaking past and 
               present through histories of displacement in the U.S. South. 
               Mapping Marronage considers this removal expansively beyond 
               flight from plantations to mountains or swamps, treating as marronage any act by which 
               enslaved people sought to move themselves beyond the reach of enslavers' power. As 
               Kaiama Glover poignantly asks, What is 
               marronage . . . if not the expression of selves imagined otherwise than 
               within the limits of identities crafted by white supremacy? 
                Working from this expansive understanding, 
               Mapping Marronage visualizes fugitivity not as discrete 
               events but as an on-going process, a relationship to space and power that is in flux and 
               constantly negotiated in slaveholding societies. The digital visualization therefore 
               traces the geographic reach, crossings, and intersections of letters, testimonies, and 
               financial exchanges by people of African descent who were either enslaved or lived in 
               proximity to slavery as, for example, the freeborn children of enslaved parents. Enslaved 
               women, men, and children sought to move — with varying degrees of success — beyond the 
               reach of slavery's oppression. At the same time, the far-reaching power of slavery meant 
               that mobility in and of itself did not automatically constitute resistance or marronage. 
               Rather, various forms of what Carole Boyce Davies and Babacar 
               M'Bow term coerced, voluntary, and induced movement characterized the circulation 
               of Black people living in or in proximity to slavery in the Atlantic world, 
               thus showing conditions and experiences of bondage that widen our field of vision beyond 
               the plantation . To the extent, then, that these 
               different forms of mobility recorded in advertisements for runaways, correspondence, 
               financial remittances, and court documents constituted enslaved people's 
               self-articulations, these instances of mobility form the core data for the digital map.
            
            In its invitation to users to visualize flight in all its forms, 
               Mapping Marronage undertakes the work of historical recovery. 
               The map positions itself as an alternate archive, one that, in gathering and digitizing 
               primary sources, is generally more accessible than the institutional repositories across 
               Europe and the Americas from which I first obtained those 
               records. Behind the scenes, the two cohorts of Mapping the French 
               Atlantic students who have contributed to the map for their final class projects 
               were charged with the mandate to tell the life story of an enslaved 
               person that has never been told before. In this regard, 
               Mapping Marronage is like many other digital humanities 
               projects that center on slavery with the goal of restoring to the annals of history those 
               who have been excised from it.
            
            This project of historical recovery is at the heart of many DH projects about slavery. 
               The Runaway Slaves in Eighteenth-Century Britain project, 
               for example, is a database of advertisements for fugitives that aims to draw attention to 
               those about whom we know relatively little…because so few have left 
               any records of their existence . The 
               Legacy of Slavery in Maryland project has nearly identical 
               goals for a different region of the Atlantic world, to 
               discover unknown heroes of slave flight and resistance 
               . Recovery serves a specific purpose, to reconstitute historical 
               fragments into a more complete story. In David Eltis' discussion of the 
               methodology used to produce the updated version of the Slave Voyages 
               Database the project's inclusion of the names of enslaved people 
               provide(s) an extraordinary source for historical reconstruction of 
               the history of the African peoples in America 
               . For the Documenting Africans in 
               Trans-Atlantic Slavery (DATAS/IASET) project team, 
               their tool for analyzing ethnonyms allows for a more effective method of 
               reconstructing the emergence of the African diaspora 
               . And it is through recovery that the 
               Colored Conventions Project can affirm 
               Black women's centrality to nineteenth-century Black organizing even as official records 
               erase and anonymize the very contributions, labor and infrastructure 
               . Perhaps most direct in its articulation is 
               10 Million Names with its goal to 
               Recover. Restore. Remember .
            
            The recurring terms recovery and reconstitution that appear across this 
               range of digital humanities projects about slavery and its immediate aftermath surveyed 
               above are sometimes entwined with the language of repair. To be sure, the task of coaxing 
               fragments from unyielding archives and reconstituting them into a cohesive account of the 
               lives and experiences of the enslaved is one that is fraught with peril. Régine 
               Jean-Charles asks, what and whom does the remembrance and 
               reanimation of the slave past serve?  
               For several digital projects that examine the history of slavery in institutions such as 
               universities and the church, the work of recovery offers a direct path to some form of 
               reparations. Users of the interactive map Enslaved by the Church, 
               Sold for the Republic can toggle between historical documents that reveal the 
               identities of those enslaved on parish plantations in Réunion, and news 
               about descendants' present-day advocacy for recognition and 
               redress from the Jesuits and the Catholic church. The 
               Georgetown Slavery Archive is a direct offshoot of the Georgetown 
               University Working Group on Slavery, Memory, and Reconciliation whose website 
               outlines the university's recent commitment to a form of institutional reparations by 
               considering applicants' status as descendants of people enslaved by the Maryland 
               Province of Jesuits as a factor in admission. Other institutions of higher 
               education have considered modes of repair beyond college admissions. 
               Honoring the Enslaved by St. Mary's College of 
               Maryland is a digital archive of the college's steps toward 
               re-making our world anew by erecting a monument at the site 
               of enslaved people's living quarters on campus . In grappling 
               with its involvement in slavery, Villanova University's 
               The Rooted Project aims to write a new 
               history… to give all students, prospective students, and alumni at Villanova 
               a sense of place and belonging .
            
            Other ideas about psychic repair through acknowledgement of historical crimes, or by 
               suturing severed genealogical lines, also emerge in projects that are not directly tied to 
               institutional and financial reparations. The Enslaved: Peoples of 
               the Historical Slave Trade project frames its work as one of 
               reparative scholarship . 
               Last Road to Freedom is a digital repository of records about 
               African Americans during the Civil War that is premised on the hope that 
               for their descendants, paths to freedom include interpreting 
               information (documents) the once enslaved left behind... a final path or road to the 
               ancestors' freedom and ours . Last 
               Seen: Finding Family After Slavery, a database of newspaper advertisements placed 
               by formerly enslaved people hoping to reunite with family after emancipation, solicits 
               testimonies from users today who have been successful in finding their ancestors through the 
               site's records . Perhaps the most explicitly stated work of repair 
               is the Slave Rebellion Reenactment, a collaborative work of 
               performance art by artists Dread Scott and John Akomfrah, whose 
               companion website archives snippets of a 2019 reenactment of the German Coast Uprising of 
               1811. Rather than relive the violent suppression of the largest slave revolt in the 
               U.S. South, the reenactment ends on a jubilant note with a celebration in 
               New Orleans' Congo Square.
            
            I gather these quotes from a broad range of digital projects because juxtaposing their 
               stated aims not only reveals the close entwinement of the language of historical recovery 
               with ideas about repair, but also shows the myriad ways in which repair is understood, 
               even when it is not explicitly defined.For this survey of slavery-focused DH 
               projects, I am indebted to the Colored Conventions Project 
               for its crowdsourced compendium, Black Digital Humanities Projects 
               & Resources . Another compilation, 
               A Directory of Caribbean Digital Scholarship, would be an 
               important resource for future surveys . Across these 
               projects, financial reparations, political acknowledgement, symbolic commemoration, 
               the reconnection of severed family bonds, and the production of new historical accounts 
               that undo violence and erasure all come together to offer some form of redress for the 
               losses of the past. The common language of repair that undergirds all the aforementioned 
               projects shows that when reconstituting enslaved people's histories, our desire for 
               recovery is often a desire for healing . We recuperate the 
               lives of the enslaved by carefully reassembling the scant pieces of information strewn 
               about the archival record. That such work, invested as it is in 
               repair, redemption, and recuperation 
               , is risky and largely impossible has been amply 
               explored in scholarship . Metaphors abound for the inevitable 
               losses, absences, and silences that mark the stories salvaged from slavery's archive. For 
               Saidiya Hartman, the corpus of texts about slavery in the United 
               States constitutes an amputated body, which in its 
               dismemberment holds out the possibility of restitution 
               . Derek Walcott imagines the fragments 
               of Antillean history as pieces of a broken vase, the act of restoration through artistic 
               and cultural production as an act of care. Walcott's metaphor suggests a 
               linear temporality that moves from recovery of the fragments 
               of the broken vase, to reconstitution of the parts into a 
               whole that then becomes the repaired object 
               .
            
            The fragmentation in the archive therefore shapes the stories that can and cannot be told 
               about the enslaved person's past. It determines the recuperative possibilities of work 
               undertaken by artists and historians.For analyses of recuperative possibilities in 
               Atlantic history and art, see  and , 
               respectively. We read along the bias grain in order to 
               subvert archival intent and disrupt the representational 
               power of the enslaver's record . We search for 
               ghosts, the shadowy presences that haunt the archives . Through 
               the sieve of collective memory, we sift pieces of the past, allowing 
               the smaller matter to go through and leaving only the larger material behind 
               . We engage in critical 
               fabulation to attempt the impossible, a collective biography 
               of dead subjects that aims to paint as full a picture of the 
               lives of the captives as possible . Taken 
               together, these carefully devised modes of counter-reading the 
               archive, both despite and because of the impossibility of doing so, show the 
               ever-present but also generative tension between the reality of fragmentation and our 
               reaching for wholeness . The attempt to recover 
               something of enslaved people's stories holds out the redemptive and reparative promise of 
               locating, even if only fleetingly, their interior lives, their obscured, denied 
               subjectivity.
            
            When the anonymous fugitive stole away onto the Neptune in 
               the summer of 1837, he perhaps hoped that his flight would put him beyond the reach, if 
               not of the institution of slavery, at the very least of the enslaver who kept him in 
               bondage in Martinique. When my students and I worked in the fall of 2021 to 
               piece together the fragments of his life story as it unfolded across government 
               correspondence, we hoped to honor his marronage — thwarted as it had been by his 
               discovery onboard the ship — by wresting his narrative from the anonymizing correspondence 
               between French and Danish officials and telling his story otherwise. Like the digital 
               humanities projects that enact an alternative end to a crushed slave uprising, or that 
               invite contemporary users to piece together severed kinship bonds by completing the search 
               for family members begun by their ancestors newly emancipated from slavery, or else that 
               ask us to not only acknowledge fugitives but to imagine ourselves 
               running with them, tracing routes of refuge and pathways to freedom within a tragic world 
               of captivity and coercion , Mapping 
               Marronage too sought to move between the fugitive's time and our own, and in so 
               doing, restore to him the autonomous mobility that he may have reached for through his 
               escape from Martinique. What my students and I were up against, then, was not 
               solely a lack of data to enter into the software but a challenge to our hopes for repair. 
               His anonymity brought us to the limits of our reparative project by raising a series of 
               questions: Is historical recovery required for repair? How do gaps and silences in 
               slavery's archive — such as the fugitive's anonymity — complicate the very idea of the 
               reparative that underlines digital projects seeking to bring past and present into closer 
               relation?
            
            Alongside Black Atlantic historical projects animated by the question of whether we 
               can recover the histories, lives, and voices of enslaved people is a current 
               of scholarship that questions whether we should. As the authors of 
               The Question of Recovery: An Introduction note, if recovery 
               does not have a political purpose beyond documenting black 
               presence, then it becomes merely a plea for inclusion within 
               the foundational promises of liberal modernity 
               . Stephen Best, in turn, explores 
               what might be productive about the refusal of recovery. He contends that the impetus behind 
               the recovery imperative is the idea that 
               recovery from the slave past rests on a recovery of it 
               . Best is particularly critical of what he 
               terms melancholy historicism, which 
               provides for the view that history consists in the taking 
               possession of such grievous experience and archival loss 
               . In contradistinction to mourning's acceptance of loss 
               and divestment from the lost object, melancholia maintains a steadfast attachment to and 
               identification with that which is lost . The alternative 
               to melancholy historicism that Best offers is certainly 
               not history writing as we know it but a writing in full awareness of the negativity that 
               labors to undo any historical project .
            
            In considering how interdisciplinary methods might prove useful for nuancing ideas about 
               recovery, I am particularly drawn to Lisa Lowe's exploration of the question 
               of recovery as a paradox, a divergence either between the affirmation 
               of the recovered presence of enslaved people … or the refusal of the temptations of 
               recovery . In response to this paradox, 
               Lowe proposes hesitation as a stance that does 
               not move immediately toward recovery 
               . Rather than naming the anonymous fugitive and then 
               moving on to write the rest of his recovered biography, hesitation allows us to tarry with 
               what might be productive about his anonymity. In this way, we might think of hesitation 
               not in opposition to or as an alternative to recovery, but rather as an interruption in 
               the putatively linear progression from recovery to repair.
            
            My students in Mapping the French Atlantic encountered 
               hesitation in their own way. Because the course was taught in French, a second language 
               for nearly all the students in the class, we were obliged to tarry not only in the face of 
               recorded facts and glaring omissions, but also in the presence of language. With historical 
               dictionaries in hand and Trouillot's Silencing the 
               Past uppermost in our minds, we had to consider not only what the records say 
               happened to the Neptune's clandestine passenger, but also the 
               how of their narration. What do we learn about how the language of the law 
               determined the possibilities of freedom for the enslaved man in flight? What might we 
               glimpse when we focus on the anonymity of the Neptune's 
               stowaway that we would otherwise not see if we moved immediately towards trying to repair 
               the injurious loss of his name wrought by his anonymity in French government 
               correspondence? Let us linger here, with the unknown.
            
        

          Hesitation
            Beyond his act of maritime marronage — what Hilary Beckles defines as 
               the rebellious activities of those slaves who took to the sea in 
               flight attempting to escape fully the geographical confines of their plantation 
               bondage — we know very little about the enslaved person who stole onto the 
               France-bound vessel that left Martinique in the summer of 1837. 
               If, like the Danish and French authorities who used a network of correspondence to try to 
               solve their legal conundrum, the fugitive too made use of his own 
               submerged networks — the webbed exchange of information and 
               services that made marronage for some a collective endeavor — the letters about him do not 
               say . The narrative that we do have is marked by 
               several acts of unnaming, that is, moments when language undoes meaning. Of his life 
               the official record yields the following: que le noir en 
               question ne serait pas né à la Martinique, mais y aurait été introduit 
               frauduleusement par un navire qui l'avait pris au Sénégal; que son départ de 
               la Martinique aurait été [illisible] d'une désertion, et qu'enfin l'intention du 
               capitaine du Neptune serait, lors de son premier voyage à la 
               Martinique, de rendre ce noir à l'habitant dont il était lesclave
               that the black in question was not born in Martinique but 
               was brought there fraudulently by a vessel that had taken him in Senegal; that 
               his departure from Martinique would have been [illegible] of a desertion, and 
               finally that the intention of the Neptune's captain, on his 
               first voyage to Martinique, would be to return this black to the planter whose 
               slave he was Planter and 
               slave are translations from the original French used in the 
               letters. In the rest of this paper, I use enslaver and enslaved, respectively. 
               There is some indication too that the runaway was young, as one letter describes him as 
               le jeune noir fugitif de la 
               Martinique (the young Black fugitive from 
               Martinique) . Although, as 
               Habiba Ibrahim compellingly demonstrates in  Black 
               Age, what this attribution of youth means may be less a matter of biological age 
               and more a question of the fictions that white observers and narrators project onto Black 
               captives' bodies.
            
            Dwelling on the fugitive's anonymity makes us attuned to other forms of unnaming in this 
               official account. First, the euphemism taken in 
               Senegal unnames the precise conditions of his bondage. Kidnapping, 
               capture, sale, the various terrible transactions that may have moved the fugitive by force 
               from Senegal to Martinique, are politely smoothed over by the verb 
               taken, at once simple and capacious in its potential 
               meanings.Although it is likely that the slave trade had already been abolished by the 
               unspecified time of the fugitive's capture in Senegal, whether his taking 
               was legal or illegal is an immaterial distinction from an ethical standpoint. Second, 
               the language of illegality unnames his flight as an act of self-liberation. Because his 
               capture in Senegal was fraudulent and his escape 
               from his enslaver in Martinique was an act of 
               desertion, his marronage counters one form of unsanctioned, 
               illegal movement with another. Ultimately, each instance of mobility puts him outside the 
               already constrained juridical freedoms allowed to Black people in France, a 
               country that both disavowed slavery on its soil and codified its practice in law.
            
            In Black Geographies and the Politics of Place, 
               Katherine McKittrick and Clyde Woods assert that 
               to begin a discussion of black geographies… we need to consider how the 
               unknowable figures into the production of space 
               . I read this as a form of hesitation, sitting 
               with the unknowable and the unknown to better understand not just how Black people move 
               through space but also how that movement produces space. These contemplations can in turn 
               productively inform our understanding and rendering of space. For example, we might consider 
               how the unnamed fugitive produced a space for his clandestine flight aboard the 
               Neptune. He may have hidden in plain sight, boldly striding 
               across the ship's deck in sailor's garb. As Julius Scott notes, 
               Even slaves without experience at sea could pick up some key nautical 
               terms or perhaps a verse or two of a popular sea shanty and pass themselves off as free 
               sailors .On maritime maroons impersonating 
               free people of color, see . For a discussion of enslaved 
               mariners in the Atlantic world, see . Although the 
               letters that inaugurate his entry into slavery's archive begin with his capture on the 
               Neptune, tarrying at the docks disrupts this imposed temporal 
               origin by dwelling on the period before the ship when the fugitive may have engaged in the 
               urban marronage that brought so many other runaways to Caribbean port cities 
               . Alternatively, he may quite literally have produced 
               space by fashioning a site of concealment somewhere on the ship, akin to the box that 
               transported the fugitive Henry Box Brown as cargo to Philadelphia 
               , or the loophole of retreat that 
               allowed Harriet Jacobs to both escape the clutches of her lascivious enslaver 
               and remain close to her children .
            
            It is not a stretch to stray from the geographic boundaries of the field of Caribbean Studies, 
               or from the well-traveled colonial circuit between Senegal, 
               Martinique, and France and bring the 
               Neptune's clandestine passenger into conceptual proximity with 
               North American fugitives. As Justin Dunnavant reminds us, 
               popular abolitionists such as Henry Box Brown, 
               Frederick Douglass, and Harriet Jacobs can be read as maritime 
               maroons in the literal sense that their flight was mediated, at least in part, by 
               marinescapes . Nor is it a stretch, for the 
               purposes of Mapping Marronage, to expand the maroon's geography 
               by untethering our mapped coordinates for his flight from the archival record. Already in the 
               official correspondence there were indications that his geography would always exceed the 
               named territories of Senegal, Martinique, Denmark, and 
               France, for even as government officials tried to identify the correct 
               jurisdiction for his manumission case and thereby fix the geographic coordinates of his legal 
               status, they also acknowledged that at the time of their correspondence, the maroon was 
               somewhere in the North Sea en route to Le Havre. It is there in the 
               North Sea that we lose his archival trail, unmoored from land, from the 
               free soil that was supposed to grant him his liberty in France. 
               Elena Schneider writes of similar cases of maritime marronage to 
               Cuba: uplifting narratives of escape could devolve into 
               ongoing, labyrinthine struggles for autonomy, property, and protection, proving 
               Neil Roberts's thesis that Black freedom is an ongoing state of 
               marronage . Between his enslavement in 
               Martinique and the freedom the Neptune fugitive 
               reached for as he sought out French soil was a world of experience, knowledge, strategy, 
               desire, and chance, a world reached for but not yet attained as the cold paper trail obliges 
               us to leave him there, floating in the North Sea. Following Elise 
               Mitchell's approach that challenges the primacy of origins and 
               destinations and emphasizes the itinerant crossings and small places between them, where the 
               enslaved stalled, were abandoned, why not untether him even further from the 
               confinement of the official record's limited geography and consider other connections to 
               other small places between ?
            
            Given the repeated illegality of his mobility, always operating outside the law as either the 
               victim of nefarious kidnappers flouting European legal interdictions of the slave trade 
               (abolished by Denmark in 1803 and by France in 1817 and again in 
               1831) or as a stowaway, the imagined possibilities for appropriating and producing space to 
               create sites of marronage serve as more than a reach for the speculative to fill in gaps and 
               silences. They illustrate the process of turning a geography of 
               containment into a rival geography. Rival geography has 
               proven to be a mobile concept. Stephanie Camp explains that it was first 
               coined by Edward Said and has been used by geographers to 
               describe resistance to colonial occupation . 
               From Camp's adaptation of the term to refer to alternative 
               ways of knowing and using plantation and southern space that conflicted with planters' ideals 
               and demands, the notion of rival geography finds its way here to describe how an 
               African man, forcibly taken from Senegal and enslaved in Martinique, 
               briefly turned an instrument of captivity into a vessel for freedom. The enslaved man crossed 
               the ocean at least twice, first as cargo and then as fugitive, and while the 
               Neptune was not a slave ship in 1837, we already know to expect 
               that if the creaking of its rigging or the groaning of its wood reminded its clandestine 
               passenger of another journey on another ship, those who wrote about him probably did not know 
               and likely would not have cared. The correspondence about him does not — cannot — speak about 
               haunting, but Laurent Dubois aptly describes the dual meaning that vessels on 
               Atlantic waters carried, what may have felt like haunting for a Black person on a ship: 
               All ships in the Atlantic World were, in a sense, haunted by the slave 
               ship, which in some ways was the defining vessel of the entire system. … And yet ships were 
               also a space of movement and represented the possibility of freedom…. They were a space where 
               there was a potential for individual freedom, for being on the sea was a way to escape 
               geographies of empire and juridical systems that locked people in particular kinds of status 
               and possibility.  If we imagine this 
               Neptune as haunted by the other 
               Neptunes that, between 1730 and 1750, left Nantes, 
               La Rochelle, and Le Havre (where the fugitive was now headed), to 
               ferry African captives from Ouidah and Aného (formerly Little 
               Popo) to Martinique and Saint Domingue, then, for a fleeting 
               moment, the fugitive's act of maritime marronage transforms the 
               Neptune he traveled on from a space haunted by a history of 
               containment to an instrument of liberation.For a record of ships named 
               Neptune in the transatlantic slave trade, see 
               www.slavevoyages.org. Lest we read 
               this as a triumphant story of resistance, a letter addressed from The 
               North Sea reminds us of the conditions of entry into the archival record. With the 
               runaway's seizure by the captain, the Neptune is transformed 
               again into a site of captivity.
            
            But there is still more to be done in this moment of hesitation with the fragment of a story 
               about flight stalled in the North Sea, when an enslaved man's production of 
               space temporarily turned a ship into something other than what its captain would accept. 
               Maritime maroons, Kevin Dawson reminds us, 
               were humanity in fluid motion, daring to paddle and swim across slave 
               ships' wake to rechart their destinies and redefine the ocean according to African 
               valuations . If we return to the possibility 
               that the Neptune's maroon created a space of concealment on the 
               ship not unlike well-known North American fugitives, then untethering his geography from a 
               strictly Caribbean or francophone circuit through this conceptual proximity to a seemingly 
               unrelated place, brings us closer to honoring the spirit of his flight, if not through 
               historical accuracy, then through a deliberately unruly geography 
               . This practice of counter-hegemonic 
               cartography that charts space and movement against the current of imperial circuits, is akin 
               to what Dunnavant et. al describe in their method of using geospatial modeling 
               to the rival ends of counter-mapping maroon cartographies 
               .For a discussion of 
               chronocartography as another example of this mapping beyond and 
               against imperial logics and specifically in the French colonial context, see 
               .
            
            It was through this act of counter-mapping by connecting the Neptune 
               fugitive to places unnamed and unmentioned in official correspondence that my students and I 
               settled on a way to identify the fugitive on the digital map. We chose to model his name on 
               that of a Haitian monument to liberty, Le marron inconnu 
               de Saint Domingue (The Unknown Maroon of 
               Saint Domingue). The Neptune's unwanted 
               passenger therefore entered our Mapping Marronage database as 
               First name: Unnamed, Last name: Fugitive (see Figure 1 and 2). 
               Like Sasha Turner, who insists in her writing about the 
               nameless and the forgotten that the work of maternal grief in 
               slavery affirms the invisible suffering of the enslaved, we tried to reach for an 
               appellation that makes present what cannot be seen but must have been there. He must 
               have had a name. We hoped that by referring to him as Unnamed 
               Fugitive, instead of recovering that lost name, we would honor his desire not to be 
               apprehended, all the while affirming that he had once been called something other than 
               property. We imagined Unnamed Fugitive as a choice that refuses 
               anonymity but — in the event that the maroon declined to give his name to authorities in an 
               act of self-preservation — still let[s] fugitives remain at 
               large .
            
            
              Biographical narrative for the Unnamed Fugitive of Mapping 
                 Marronage.
              
              Screenshot of a page on Mapping Marronage, 
                       which provides a biographical narrative for the unnamed fugitive on the 
                       Neptune.
              
                
            
            
              Flight map for the Unnamed Fugitive on Mapping Marronage.
              Screenshot of a page on Mapping Marronage, 
                       which shows the flight map for the unnamed fugitive on the 
                       Neptune.
              
                
            
            The statue of the Unknown Maroon, located across from the Palais National in 
               Port-au-Prince and in proximity to monuments to Toussaint 
               L'Ouverture, Jean Jacques Dessalines, Alexandre Petion, and 
               Henri Christophe has served as a malleable symbol of Haitian national identity 
               for several decades. Dimitri Bechaq argues that different political entities 
               have imbued the monument with various meanings over time. For the Black nationalist 
               noiriste ideology of François Duvalier, under whose 
               brutal regime the monument was constructed between 1967 and 1968, the Unknown Maroon was 
               conscripted to symbolize an unbroken line from Black fugitives in the period of slavery to 
               Haiti's Black (as opposed to mixed-race) political leadership in the 20th 
               century. For UNESCO, during the commemoration of the abolition of slavery in 2004, the 
               monument signaled Haiti's place as the cornerstone of freedom and independence 
               in the Caribbean. The Unknown Maroon stands in for the many who absconded. 
               Naming the Neptune's fugitive after this symbol of multiple 
               flights in turn asks those many nameless maroons to stand in for the one.On historical 
               subjects as stand-ins for one another's stories, see . 
               Our choice to bring the Unnamed Fugitive into the orbit of Haitian marronage by modeling his 
               name after the Unknown Maroon also functions much like the reading of his hiding spaces 
               alongside those of Brown and Jacobs. It allows us, if not to 
               entirely untether him from the geographies inscribed in and circumscribed by official 
               correspondence (Senegal-Martinique-Denmark-
               France), to at least expand that geography beyond the archive's limits.
            
            Is this expanded geography an act of repair? Or, given some of the troubling ways that the 
               historical figure of the Unknown Maroon has been recuperated for contemporary political ends, 
               are reclamation, preservation, and remembrance merely a question of 
               re-enacting hegemony? . 
               McKittrick and Woods again offer us a way forward when they note 
               that inserting black geographies into our worldview can trouble 
               dominant modes of geographic thought and allow us to 
               consider alternative ways of imagining the world 
               . We might go further, then, to imagine how 
               unmooring the fugitive from the Danish site of his discovery — the site at which he was most 
               visible to the law — and bringing him into proximity with other maroons in the 
               Americas might allow us to render space differently, to recreate the map entirely 
               rather than simply inserting him into existing coordinates. The Unnamed Fugitive poses a 
               problem for mapping marronage, not because he is anonymous, but because we sought to place him 
               within the bounds of a map that cannot sufficiently account for Black fugitive geographies. 
               Rather than counter-mapping the terraqueous geography of his flight, perhaps then his 
               unnaming can only be accounted for by unmapping his marronage.
            
        

          Unmapping
            It has been three years since I last taught Mapping the French 
               Atlantic and in that time I have had occasions to reflect not only on what I hope my 
               students took away from the course, but also on what I learned from them and their struggles 
               to tell an impossible story . 
               Because the Unnamed Fugitive's story brought us to the limits of recovery and repair — he 
               remains, after all, anonymous, and I remain ambivalent about what this appellation does and 
               undoes — the lesson I have come away with casts the future of Mapping 
               Marronage in doubt. Bold lines slashing out across the ocean from one landmass to 
               another cannot render all the ways Black people moved furtively, guided by knowledge their 
               pursuers could not access, impelled by desires their captors would not know to recognize. A 
               database is not a memorial. A map is not a commemoration. Cartography cannot represent Black 
               geographies of fugitivity unless it disrupts far more than spatial coordinates. In his 
               unraveling of our medium, then, the Unnamed Fugitive nudges us to consider what it would look 
               like to instead unmap enslaved people's mobility. In this, I am guided by two digital 
               humanities projects invested in the work of undoing.
            
            (Un)Silencing Slavery: Remembering the Enslaved at Rose Hall Plantation, 
               Jamaica is a companion website to Celia Naylor's book 
               Unsilencing Slavery: Telling Truths About Rose Hall Plantation, 
               Jamaica. The website's objective is to respectfully and lovingly 
               remember and hold space for the enslaved Africans and their enslaved African-born and 
               Caribbean-born descendants who lived and labored at Rose Hall Plantation in 
               Jamaica . Naylor's larger project 
               of unearthing information about the people who were enslaved on the plantation grew out of 
               her frustration that the narrative available to tourists who visited the site focuses on the 
               plantation's owners and excludes the enslaved entirely. Naylor's point of 
               departure was to undo the narrative of Rose Hall Plantation, both the fictional 
               stories told about it and the silence around enslaved people that engenders yet another kind 
               of fiction. As Naylor explains, her work is an exercise in 
               attending (and tending) to the erasure and recasting of slavery and 
               Black suffering and survival in the contemporary tours at Rose Hall Great 
               House . Strikingly, over and over again in 
               her book, the primary manifestation of this erasure is the anonymity of the enslaved, and the 
               first step to redress, it seems, is to restore their names. Naylor affirms that 
               to disrupt the official Rose Hall narrative is to begin to 
               name those enslaved who have been unremembered and unmemorialized; it is to begin to 
               reconstruct stories buried and deemed unworthy of telling and retelling; it is to begin to 
               reimagine the struggles, suffering, and sanctity of people enslaved (though not entirely 
               dehumanized) . In other words, 
               retelling, reconstruct[ing], but first, naming.
            
            Given my own ambivalence about recovery and repair, what I find most productive about 
               Naylor's companion website is how its form works against the notion of recovery 
               as inserting lost information back into an extant historical record. In her book's opening 
               chapters, Naylor walks readers carefully through a detailed description of the 
               archive as a physical space and material object. She shows lists that enumerate names, births, 
               deaths, economic value, and clothing allowances. In a particularly powerful and moving 
               meditation elsewhere, Naylor has reflected on the experience of seeing her own 
               name and variations thereof — Celia and Cecelia — on some of these 
               lists . Far from an abstraction, the archive is a room in 
               which Naylor sits, yearning for fuller records, and where she is confronted 
               instead with the epistemic violence of witnessing people — some called by her own name — be 
               rendered as property through lists that we might understand today as early databases.
            
            And yet despite, or perhaps because of this careful attention to enumeration in her book, 
               lists themselves are not the organizing frame for the companion website. 
               (Un)silencing Slavery does present the forgotten names of those 
               enslaved at Rose Hall Plantation, but it does so in the form of flower petals. 
               Selecting the name of each enslaved person in a list on the right-hand side of the screen 
               illuminates a single petal of the larger yellow-, pink- and purple-hued flower, revealing a 
               brief biography with what Naylor has gleaned about that person's life. 
               Naylor's visualization began in analog mode as a series of concentric circles 
               she drew on paper to imagine the enslaved people at Rose Hall as part of a 
               community tree (see Figure 3). Tree rings are a historical record of the environment. They 
               tell tales about age and time, about stressors looming deep in the soil and life teeming in 
               branches above. They may be the thick etching of abundant rainfall, the blackened scar of a 
               wildfire, or the telltale mark of how high deadly floodwaters rose. But we can only read those 
               stories after the work of sharp blade against bark and xylem is done. The rings of 
               Naylor's chopped-down tree on paper are carried over to the digital flower as a 
               faint visual echo of black dots; a digital flower that in its evocative and terrible beauty, 
               leans towards life and growth . 
               Naylor's flower is an acknowledgement of slavery's violence and a need to make 
               visible the forms of care and kinship and community that existed among the enslaved at 
               Rose Hall. This is a project of undoing by unraveling form, refusing 
               the sharp edges of social scientific graphic conventions and 
               tending instead the fragile, rounded petals of a digital rose .
            
            
              Naylor's community tree.
              Sketch of the Community Tree visualization made 
                       by Professor Celia E. Naylor in 2019.
              
                
            
            
              Naylor's digital rose.
              Screenshot of the digital rose visualization showing the enslaved people 
                 Rose Hall on the (Un)Silencing Slavery website.
              
                
            
            Unlike Naylor's website, which is grounded in a research monograph, 
               Tao Leigh Goffe's Unmapping the Caribbean: Sanctuary and 
               Sound is a pedagogically situated project animated by a practice of 
               sonic un/mapping  (see Figure 
               5). Goffe writes that unmapping as a digital praxis embraces 
               the opacity of sensory disorientation. If mapping is about knowing and surveying, then 
               unmapping is about unknowing and uncharting the territory 
               . In a course titled Caribbean 
               Writing, Reggae, and Routes that teaches students to be attuned to the interpretive 
               possibilities that sound opens up for rendering Caribbean space, Goffe tasks her 
               students with creating story maps for Jamaica, New York, 
               Surinam, Hispaniola, and Cuba.
            
            
              Landing page of Unmapping the Caribbean.
              Screenshot of the landing page of the Unmapping the 
                       Caribbean project.
              
                
            
            Where Mapping Marronage and (Un)Silencing 
               Slavery work within the constraints of tooltips that require an economy of text, the 
               StoryMaps tool allows for narrative-heavy spatial visualizations, and Goffe's 
               students make apt use of this functionality to create a multisensory digital environment 
               in Unmapping the Caribbean. They layer the sound of 
               New York City's subway with that of ocean waves, and this original soundtrack is 
               itself one of several layers that include photographs, videos, poems, and expository essays. 
               Here, we are far from the turn-by-turn directions of Google Maps, from the surveilling, 
               surveying rendering of traditional cartography. Unmapping, as Goffe's 
               students show, is a playful provocation that tells stories, not only about the 
               Caribbean, but with it, with its inhabitants, its culture, and its 
               topography.
            
            The Unnamed Fugitive's anonymity produced a crisis of form that reverberates long after our 
               semester's encounter with him ended. Read in tandem, (Un)Silencing 
               Slavery  and Unmapping the Caribbean address the 
               generative tensions at the heart of charting his flight: anonymity and mapping, respectively. 
               They offer particularly compelling examples of how we might reimagine the forms through which 
               we visually render Black lives in the Atlantic world beyond the genres that were used as 
               tools of capture, subjection, and enumeration, beyond the logic of the 
               ledger and the list . In the early days of 
               teaching Mapping the French Atlantic, I imagined that each 
               semester's cohort would work with new primary sources, adding ever more names and itineraries 
               to an increasingly populated map. But a crisis of form is perhaps another way of 
               saying a crisis of faith, and I am no longer certain that such a project amounts to a 
               black digital practice [that] charts a path against the drive for data… 
               [that] curates the mourning, dissembles against the plantation impulse, and, in the break, 
               absconds . (Un)Silencing 
               Slavery and Unmapping the Caribbean inform new 
               directions for my course's next iterations, but the future of Mapping 
               Marronage looks like neither of these websites. If Mapping 
               Marronage is to yield a map that is engraved with the echo of 
               runaway desire, of refusal, then its future will have to return to the traces of 
               texts and utterances and etchings and songs and moans by which maroons' fugitive dreams 
               filter to us in the present — and to the reefs and sandbars and shoals and terraqueous 
               formations that bear witness to other forms of liberation beyond 
               free soil .On offshore 
               formations, see Disbro (2021) and King (2019).
            
            The lingering questions that haunt the scant record of the anonymous maroon's life have 
               remained with me, popping up unbidden and with unpredictable frequency, leaving me wondering 
               whether his was an iterative practice of marronage; whether he was returned to bondage in 
               Martinique only to continue to study weather and terrain until he could launch 
               himself once more into a world beyond his enslaver's grip; whether after the 
               Neptune he touched earth and blended into the multihued human 
               traffic of a bustling port city, leaving as the only trace of his fleeting presence the 
               whistled melody of a rude seaman's shanty trailing on the air; whether there was an 
               after the Neptune at all. I imagine 
               other, more dire outcomes too, a reminder to cherish the moments when 
               black dissidents…get lost beyond recovery, beyond enumeration 
               . This serves as a reminder that when it comes to slavery's 
               archives of death, often what is not there is living 
               .
            
            I am working on a new syllabus for Mapping the French Atlantic 
               that uses the same primary sources already represented on Mapping 
               Marronage. My task for my students is no longer to tell untold stories but to 
               remix stories already told, using forms that unravel cartography 
               . I cannot yet say what those forms will be because they 
               will have to emerge organically — like the natural, living matter of Naylor's 
               vegetal inspiration — from a student-teacher collaboration that balances delicately between 
               guidance and autonomy. Our work may very well yield a map to nowhere at all 
               (tant mieux!). I do know that rather than improving 
               the existing digital map, I intend to have both iterations of the website — the current one 
               that maps marronage and another that unmaps it — viewable in tandem, allowing users to see 
               not just a finished product, but the process of unraveling and remaking. M. Jacqui 
               Alexander writes that crossings are never undertaken all at once, 
               and never once and for all . It is my hope 
               that by evolving into a site that is transparently iterative, Mapping 
               Marronage will illustrate the fits and starts of maroon journeys, as well as the many 
               stops along the way to freedom.
            
        

          Acknowledgements
            I am grateful to the special issue's editors, Richard Roberts, Walter 
               Hawthorne, Fatoumata Seck, and Rebecca Wall for their kind 
               invitation to participate in the conversations that have culminated in this issue and for 
               their patience and understanding through the process. I am also grateful to this article's 
               peer reviewers for their guidance. Shout-out to Reviewer C for bibliographic suggestions 
               offered with breathtaking generosity.
            
        
