Title:  Designing for discovery: using web maps in the
               digital humanities
Volume:  019
Issue:  3
Date:  14 November 2025
Abstract:  
            
            Web map interfaces such as OpenStreetMap or Google Maps share a set of visual and
               interactive features that are widely used for navigation and discovering information.
               Associated software components such as Leaflet or Google Maps Embed API have become
               the de facto standard for geographical visualisation in the
               digital humanities. This article examines how the needs of humanities researchers can
               inform the design of these web map components’ features. Visual analysis and
               discovery use cases for web maps are introduced based on the TaDiRAH taxonomy of
               digital research activities. Visual analysis offers researchers opportunities to gain
               geographical insights from patterns in humanities data. Yet visual features of web
               map components such as the Web Mercator projection and background mapping tiles are
               only appropriate for the analysis of certain regions and scales. A discovery use case
               is introduced with the aim of using the map to access research objects. The article
               argues that visual features such as vector representations and popups can be designed
               to guide the user towards accessing rich content beyond the map. This use case aligns
               with researchers’ experience of using web map components elsewhere and projects that
               wish to encourage usage of research objects. Web map components have expedited the
               process of creating visualisations. Yet their convenience has led to a lack of
               spatial literacy and critical reflection. The article argues that historical and
               wider usage should be considered when appropriating any form of visualisation.
               Examining the research process helps the design of visualisations to support use
               cases, guiding users in addressing the open-ended and complex questions of the
               humanities.
         
Full Body Text: 
Web maps based on shared standards and common design principles are part of a suite of
            technologies developed since the late-twentieth century that created new approaches to geographic information distribution and, most importantly,
               in the usability and ease of application development
            . Proprietary and open-source APIs, platforms and services
            provided by Google, Carto, Mapbox, OpenStreetMap and others have lowered the level of
            expertise required to create maps, opening up geospatial data to new audiences and uses.
            Web maps such as Leaflet or Google Maps Embed API are now a mainstay of digital
            humanities courses and research projects and have become the de
               facto standard for geographical visualisation. Stuart Dunn notes that the launch
            of web mapping platforms like OpenStreetMap (OSM) in 2004
            coincided with the floruit of the spatial turn
             and, alongside Geographical Information Systems
            (GIS), web maps have been key to the burgeoning interest in geography amongst digital
            humanists through the developing Spatial Humanities
            . In 2025, they represent the most commonly used form of
            visualisation amongst digital humanists employed by five of the eleven winners in the
               DH Awards Best DH Visualization category between 2012
            and 2024 . Yet, whilst the application of GIS in the
            digital humanities has been subject to decades of critical reflection , the use of web maps has received scant attention with a few
            notable exceptions 
            
            . Indeed, web maps are commonly subsumed within the category
               Web or DH GIS . In acknowledging the
            complexity of visualisation from a humanities perspective, recent scholarship has
            emphasised the need for graphical forms… capable of expressing
               ambiguity, contradiction, nuance, change
            . This article asks whether the web map
            component offers a constructive, effective, or appropriate method of visualising
            humanities data. To do so, it examines how such maps could be used in the humanities
            research process drawing on the TaDiRAH taxonomy of digital
               research activities in the humanities
             to outline discovery and visual analysis use cases.
               TaDiRAH offers a formal classification of digital humanities research with the aim of
               helping scholars to find the tools and resources they are interested in. This
            user-centred design approach draws on perspectives from cartography and visualisation
            research and is illustrated by the use of web maps in two collaborative projects that
            the author contributed to.

            Definitions and scope
            The term web map component refers not to a single piece of software or service
               but rather to several software libraries that share core features. Maps, described
               variously as interactive, dynamic, or slippy, have become commonplace on the web
               since the 1990s. Coded in Javascript and displayed in web browsers, they consume
               geospatial data structured according to a set of standards set out by the Open
               Geospatial Consortium (OGC) . Perhaps the seminal moment in
               the development of this technology was the release of Google Maps in 2005 . However, in 2025, examples abound and
               include Leaflet, Open Layers, MapBoxGL, Maplibre and Google Maps Embed API. User
               studies demonstrate that the predominant use of these maps is to aid movement and
               understanding of the physical environment .
               Tasks such as planning journeys and navigation fit within the revenue models of
               companies such as Google that are rooted in advertising locations for visits and
               gathering user data through GPS-enabled mobile apps . These web map components have been used to make data available in
               bespoke applications that are created by developers for individual projects, or
               platform-based applications such as Carto or Google’s MyMaps, that are more widely
               used 
               . The web map component is defined by some core features
               that exist in all software implementations and that constrain possible uses. Visual
               and interactive features sit within a rectilinear container that can be embedded into
               an HTML web page. 
            Three visual features are considered core to the component namely tiles, vectors and
               projection. Tiles form the base or background images of the web map whilst vectors
               take the form of points, polylines, or polygons, commonly styled as markers or shapes
               that sit on top of tiles. Vectors’ underlying data consist of geometries, usually in
               the form of coordinates, and attributes, text, URLs, or other information attached to
               the coordinates. The final visual feature is projection, a cartographic method used
               to transform the curved surface of the earth so that it can be viewed on a flat,
               two-dimensional one such as a screen. Interactivity is possible through a
               circumscribed set of actions that facilitate two goals: update of the visual display
               and the retrieval and display of attribute data. The former is achieved through
               zooming and panning actions that adjust the position and focus of vectors and tiles
               on screen. Attribute data can be retrieved by clicking on a vector. Particular
               implementations of web map components may, of course, contain other features such as
               a title, north arrow, text search, or scale; however, these are not essential.
               Similarly, these components might be embedded within a broader web page that
               facilitates further interactions through filters, sliders or buttons.
            
               A view from a typical web map component: Leaflet displaying tiles from
                  OpenStreetMap. (Source https://leafletjs.com/) 
               A map of London showing streets and major landmarks. An interactive pop-up
                  reads, Hello, world! I am a popup.
               
            
            Visual and interactive features are bound together in an iterative process that
               consists of three stages: seeing the cartographic representation
                  (perception), interacting with the cartographic representation to change it (motor
                  skills), and thinking about the newly created cartographic representation
                  (cognition)
               ; see also .
               The web map component’s restricted, highly structured and
                  discrete environment
                offers several advantages.
                  Out-of-the-box functionality allows developers to visualise geospatial data
               quickly and easily without having to write bespoke code for visualisation and present
               the results in a format that is familiar and intuitive to users. Yet, the design
               decisions available to the developer are constrained, and familiarity leads users to
               expectations about potential use. The question how do people use
                  Google Maps in everyday life
                is poorly understood despite the application being
               deeply embedded in people’s lives globally. This article takes this question as a
               starting point to examine the broader web map component and its use by expert
               humanities researchers specifically.
            The aforementioned out-of-the-box functionality has led maps to feature in many
               tutorials that urge digital humanists to visualise their data 
               . These tutorials pitch the component as a
               convenient method for digital humanists or developers to present data to other
               humanities researchers and as a tool for personal research based on the premise that
               visualisation stimulates geographical thinking and interpretation without the need to
               master complex GIS software. To name one example, the tutorial Using JavaScript to Create Maps of Correspondence presents a clear and
               easy-to-follow method of creating a map of historical data using Leaflet, encouraging
                  us to think about space and geography in ways that challenge
                  historiographical assumptions
               . Whilst GIS provides powerful functionality in the
               form of complex queries or statistical and algorithmic analysis, the constrained
               functionality of the web map component makes it a technology of visual communication
                  
               . The ability to embed a map within web
               pages ranging from complex bespoke apps to simple blogs has led individuals, projects
               and organisations to draw on the component to support new ways of engaging with
               humanities data. This article argues that there has been a tendency to assume such
               presentation holds intrinsic value. A thorough investigation of how the component has
               been incorporated within digital humanities interfaces to date would undoubtedly have
               value but would emphasise the intentions of the developer. Instead, this article
               seeks to emphasise the user by examining the different possible ways that the web map
               component could be used in the humanities research process and the types of insights
               these uses might lead to. 
         

            Using web maps for visual analysis
            A substantial body of research has broken digital research in the humanities down
               into constituent primitives, basic functions common to scholarly
                  activity across disciplines, over time, and independent of theoretical
                  orientation
               
               
               . Such primitives are similar to the activities defined
               within the design perspective of Don Norman as a collected set
                  of tasks, performed together towards a high-level goal
               . The TaDiRAH taxonomy of digital research activities in the humanities outlines a set
               of connected sub-activities that attempt to encapsulate the research process as a
               whole . TaDiRAH defines interpretation –the activity of ascribing meaning to phenomena observed in
                  analysis
               – as absolutely fundamental to research. Analysis, the
               process of extracting information from data, encompasses
               visualisation the use of graphical forms analytically in
               order to detect patterns, structures, or points of interest in
                  the underlying data
               . Such visual analysis could be considered the
               primary or even sole use of web maps in the digital humanities. However, this article
               argues that web maps can also assist researchers in the activity
                  of seeking out objects of research, research results, or other information
               . Referred to as discovery in the TaDIRAH
               taxonomy, the activity is associated with tasks like querying, searching, or browsing
                  . Visual analysis and
                  discovery are adopted as separate use-cases here as emphasising their
               differences offers a heuristic that can usefully inform the design of web maps.
            It might be assumed that the primary goal in using any map is to gain geographical
               insight, and a wealth of cartographic research has examined visual analysis of maps
               in terms of map reading tasks or communication models
               
               . In defining visual analysis, the
               article draws on the distinction between elementary and synoptic tasks made by
               Natalia Andrienko and Gennady Andrienko . In the
               digital humanities, a dataset is a model of a human phenomenon or behaviour that is
               derived from a research object or objects. Datasets model geographical
               characteristics of the phenomenon as coordinates. To offer insights, a map must offer
               a general view of the phenomenon’s principal parts
               , communicating the shape or a summary of
               the data. Visual patterns based on variables such as association, differentiation,
               arrangement, or distribution approximate aspects of the phenomenon through
               two-dimensional patterns including clusters, trends, boundaries, or outliers . Andrienko and Andrienko define the
               analysis of such patterns as a synoptic task: one based
               on viewing a set of data simultaneously to gain an insight that goes beyond the sum
               of individual elements . The generation of
               such an insight also rests on possessing contextual knowledge of the domain in
               question.
            
               Example of a boundary geographical pattern. Visualisation of coordinates
                  assigned to objects from several collections in the British Library. Thanks to
                  Victoria Morris for the dataset.
               
               A heat map showing a boundary geographical pattern.
            
            The goal of visual analysis might vary from hypothesis testing to hypothesis
               generation just as the developer’s intention might vary from communicating a
               geographical argument to stimulating new geographical insights 
               
               . Or, humanists might take exception to the
               epistemological framework that draws such distinctions in the use of visualisations.
               Yet, in every case, the synoptic task that underlies visual analysis focuses on the
               visual features of the web map component –projection, vectors and tiles– whilst
               interactive features play a supporting role, helping the user to explore and find
               patterns in two visual dimensions. To illustrate this use-case, the article will draw
               on an interface developed by Fredrik Palm with the assistance of the author as part
               of the Mapping the Jewish Communities of the Byzantine empire project (MJCBE) funded
               by the European Research Council. Geography is critical to interpreting the history
               of these minority communities, and the visualisation of associated geospatial data
               was intended for visual analysis. The MJCBE interface embedded a web map component,
               in this case what was Google Maps API, within a set of interactive filters that
               existed outside the component. Point vectors that represent historical references to
               the Jewish communities were displayed on a map. The filters allowed the user to
               update the points displayed on the map through combinations of attribute data.
               Attributes that formed filters include place or toponym and date as well as known
               characteristics of the community like occupation, sect, or residential conditions.
               The filtering system was designed with the complexity and flexibility to support the
               display of many permutations of vectors and therefore to afford the generation of
               unexpected or new geographical patterns. Similarly, the vectors were styled to
               communicate uncertainty visually and to offer signifiers of issues with the
               underlying references. Thus, the intention was to stimulate insights into the history
               of the communities through geography. For example, the interface might offer insights
               into the relationship between these communities and their changing political and
               economic contexts within the wider Byzantine empire . Yet
               the interface only displayed data that are directly related to the Jewish communities
               meaning users would have to draw on their wider knowledge in order to interpret
               visual patterns. Released in 2013, the interface was available when this article was
               submitted but has since become unavailable, it will serve as an example of this
               visual analysis use case throughout the article .
            
               Web map component embedded within interactive functionality in the MJCBE
                  interface.
               The Mapping the Jewish Communities of the Byzantine empire project webpage
                  with an embedded interactive map.
               
            
            In the discussion that follows, MJCBE is used to explore the visual analysis use
               case. However, MJCBE is representative of many other interfaces that employ web map
               components for visual analysis. Like MJCBE, such interfaces may or may not include
               complex interactive functionality outside the web map component. The focus here,
               however, is on the component and how the design of its features might support the
               visual analysis use case. Examples of interfaces that might be used for visual
               analysis include: 
                  The Map of Islamophobia Over Time: One of several maps that the Mapping
                     Islamophobia project has created. Here, the style of the vectors and absence of
                     popups suggests that the primary use is the visual analysis of changing
                     geographical patterns through time .
                   The Mapping Past Societies project: Offers the ability to layer a wealth of
                     historical geospatial data for visual comparison and affords access to
                     attributes in a popup akin to GIS .
                   Pauliceia 2.0: Focuses on mapping the history of the city of São Paulo
                     offering the ability to view, upload and download GIS data .
                   Power of Attorney in Oaxaca, Mexico: Maps of legal documents in Mexico. The
                     accompanying text tells us that the resource analyzes and
                        expresses the history of native people’s engagement with Mexico’s colonial
                        and post-independence legal systems by digitally mapping and visualizing
                        social networks and flows of knowledge and power created by legal procedures
                        and litigation. From this process broad trends
                        emerge
                     .  Sincere thanks to John Levin for curating a
                        list of DH GIS projects and making these available on the Anterotesis blog
                           . Without this tremendous resource I would not
                        have been able to compile these examples or indeed write this article.
                     
                  
               
            Some of these examples make the intention for visual analysis explicit in text
               accompanying the web map; for others, the use case can be inferred by using the
               interface. The developers of each of the examples that follow may not have explicitly
               intended them to be used for visual analysis, rather an examination of the
               affordances of their features by the author suggests they support this use case.
         

            Designing for discovery
            The web map acts as a visual method of accessing digital research objects such as
               text, images, or sounds in the discovery use case. A suitable dataset must first,
               include coordinates that represent a geographical characteristic of each object, and
               second, offer access to rich representations of the objects usually taking the form
               of URLs pointing to objects hosted within the app or externally. An idealised
               discovery process consists of two stages. The first stage is interactive including
               zoom and pan to discover a single vector of interest. The user might have a
               predetermined idea of what they were looking for resulting in instrumental and purposeful
                behaviour or, alternatively, behaviour
               might encompass browsing or exploration. The location that a chosen vector represents
               may or may not be familiar to the user, meaning domain-specific knowledge is not
               essential. The second stage is interactive and based on the retrieval of attribute
               data: in practice, clicking on a vector to trigger a popup, so-called details on demand
               . The resulting popup might include the
               research object itself or, more commonly, a hyperlink. The user might be interested
               in several research objects, in which case they would find their representative
               vectors sequentially, by clicking on a single vector at a time. The other vectors
               might help identify a vector of interest, but their relationships are not the focus
               of cognition. Discovery is therefore based on what Andrienko and Andrienko term
               elementary tasks. Elementary tasks examine individual elements
                  of the data
                and, in contrast to synoptic tasks, do
               not lead to an insight, interpretation, or developed understanding of the phenomenon
               that the data represents. Both visual analysis and discovery rely on the same set of
               visual and interactive features within the three-stage iterative process of
               perception, interaction, and cognition outlined earlier . The key distinction between the use cases lies in the intended
               focus of cognition: For discovery, the focus is on research objects that can be
               accessed through the map whilst, in the case of visual analysis, the focus is on the
               visual features of the map. A map designed for discovery should act as a portal or
               gateway to research objects. As far as is possible the web map doesn’t intervene as an explanation or argument
               , although it is acknowledged that this ideal
               might be unachievable. Discovery is not simply information retrieval. Web maps do not
               demand queries, they present navigable representations of large
                  digital collections; they invite exploration and support browsing, using overviews
                  to establish context and offer the potential for serendipitous discovery
                  . Yet, the extent to which they can
               present the complexity and diversity of cultural collections,
                  and to privilege the process of interpretation
                and can be defined as generous in Mitchell Whitelaw’s terms, is unclear.
            This discovery use case will be familiar to researchers from their use of web maps
               elsewhere, including tasks such as booking accommodation or buying property online.
               User studies show that Google Maps are no longer used only as a
                     map, but also to obtain further information (including opening hours,
                  available goods, prices)
               . Sixty percent of a representative sample
               of the UK public liked to have practical information about
                  places (e.g. opening hours, pictures, reviews) available to them when using online
                  map interfaces making this the second most popular function after
               navigation . Discovery aligns with the goals of
               cultural heritage organisations who are interested in driving traffic to web pages
               and in encouraging the use of a breadth of digital objects. However, as the examples
               outlined below demonstrate, the use case can also support digital humanities
               projects. Therefore, to illustrate the discovery use case, the article will draw on
               Peripleo, a web map interface developed by Rainer Simon with support from Stephen
               Gadd, Leif Isaksen, and the author as part of the Locating a National Collection
               project and funded by the UK’s Arts and Humanities Research Council . The interface was designed to help researchers and the
               wider public to discover web pages that represent the collections of the UK’s
               cultural heritage organisations. Developers are able to create their own instances of
               Peripleo based on Linked Data in the form of JSON-LD files. Javascript Object
                  Notation Linked Data. A lightweight human-readable linked-data format for
                  exchanging data on the web. The interface includes search and filtering
               functionality that updates vectors shown on the map and the colour of their
               representations. In creating this interface, the development team took design
               decisions that tailored its use for discovery, and these will be outlined in the
               remainder of this article. 

            
               Peripleo web map interface displaying VisitPlus dataset from Locating a
                  National Collection (https://britishlibrary.github.io/locating-a-national-collection/VisitPlus.html)
                  (Source: ) 
               
                  
                     
                        Your browser does not support iframes. Embedded document may be found at
                              https://britishlibrary.github.io/peripleo-lanc/visitplus/#/?/?/?/mode=points
                        
                     
                  
               
            

            Peripleo is representative of several interfaces that support the discovery use case.
               Whilst the text that accompanies these maps might not detail their intended purpose
               explicitly, as with the maps intended for visual analysis, potential use can be
               inferred from the design of features and their affordances. Examples include:
            
               
                  Charles Booth’s London: Connects
                  Booth’s maps of London with references to geography in pages from Booth’s notebook
                  made available in an International Image Interoperability Framework (iiif) viewer
                     .
               
                  Countering Islamaphobia maps:
                  The Mapping Islamaphobia website also makes this map available that offers
                  prominent links to journalism and other sources of information through simple
                  vector markers .
               
                  Cleveland Historical: Stories
                  related to locations in Cleveland available from map popups 
               Danish Manors: Offers access to information on Danish Manors from a
                  simple map interface .
               
                  Travellers maps: This modern map of traveling, which aims at promoting the Hellenic
                        world acts as a gateway to multimedia resources .
            
         

            Interactive features
            Decisions taken in designing these features can provide signifiers that emphasise
               particular affordances. Such signifiers are particularly important as researchers do
               not necessarily have a use-case in mind. Digital humanities scholarship has argued
               that assuming users have a predetermined goal is unrealistic and counter-productive
                  
               . Rather, users will initially enter into
               exploratory behaviour to understand how the map might be used in their research. In
               this exploratory phase, users will draw on their experiences of using similar
               interfaces elsewhere. However, the user should not be left observing without any clear purpose, rambling through the data in the hope of
                  encountering something interesting, which might provide food for thought
                  and lead to a sudden insight
               . The developer should have an intended
               use for the map in mind: Good design communicates this potential use by providing
               signifiers to guide the user. 
            The widespread use of web maps leads users to possess pre-existing knowledge of
               affordances. It is unnecessary to provide signifiers that panning, moving the
               geographical display of the map, is possible by clicking, holding and moving the
               mouse laterally or longitudinally. Similarly, users will know that turning the mouse
               wheel facilitates zooming in and out. However, the developer should always consider
               constraining the geographical area that can be panned whilst limiting the ability to
               zoom. The affordance that vectors offer to retrieve attribute data through a click is
               familiar to users from previous experience. Most would be unsurprised when their
               click triggers the appearance of a popup in the browser displaying text, a hyperlink,
               an image or a video. The motivation for retrieving attribute data differs based on
               use case. In visual analysis, attributes point to evidence on
                  which the argument is based
                such as dates, sources or people. Although
               they deepen understanding of the primary synoptic task, their retrieval is a
               secondary concern. For the discovery use case, the retrieval of attribute data such
               as URLs that represent research objects is the primary affordance.
            The developer has several opportunities to provide signifiers that guide the user.
               For example, vectors’ representations can be tailored to emphasise that they are
               clickable by providing a symbol of sufficient size and opacity or by employing tool
               tips. More complex vector designs such as heatmaps (see Figure 2) or
                  choropleths A thematic map that displays statistical information as
                  colours. afford visual analysis but might obscure the ability to click and
               retrieve attributes. The use of tiles that are lighter in colour and that contain
               less detail can emphasise the ability to click on a vector. If the developer intends
               the map to be used for discovery, simple vector representations are preferable, as
               they guide the user away from visual analysis and towards the elementary task of
               finding an individual vector and clicking. For example, the Peripleo interface uses
               simple circles to emphasise the affordance of clicking. The form in which attribute
               data are displayed on retrieval should vary depending on use case. Where the
               attribute data are intended to support visual analysis, their popup display should
               not obscure the map and those attributes that are relevant to visual analysis can be
               emphasised. A concise popup, that can be closed easily, offers a simple route to
               return to the map view preventing the user from leaving the map entirely. In
               contrast, in the discovery use case, greater emphasis should be placed on the display
               of attribute data. For instance, a modal that displays attributes whilst deactivating
               other content on the page was used to good effect in Charles Booth’s London map when
               this paper was written . The research object or the method
               of accessing the research object should be emphasised in the display. Hyperlinks that
               provide access to research objects should be prominent and housed within a button or
               other clear signifier. In the case of Booth’s map, the modal offers a prominent link
               to relevant pages from Booth’s notebook.
            Signifying the importance of these hyperlinks is the most important consideration
               when designing for discovery. Furthermore, previews that communicate properties of
               hyperlinked research objects such as media types like image, video or text should be
               considered . Finally, as web analytics
               can capture relevant user interactions including statistics for the opening of popups
               and subsequent click-throughs to research objects, they offer clear metrics for the
               use of maps designed for discovery. For example, popups in the Peripleo interface
               provide prominent hyperlinks in the form of buttons alongside the ability to install
               web analytics. On the other hand, such metrics were not considered for the MJCBE
               interface where hyperlinks are less prominent and do not offer access to rich data or
               relevant research objects. In summary, the importance of retrieving attribute data
               varies between use cases. The ability to access attributes that represent research
               objects is critical to discovery. For visual analysis, the retrieval of attribute
               data only supports the synoptic task that focuses on the visual features of the map.
               With this key distinction established, the next section will examine the design of
               visual features and associated signifiers that the developer can use to guide the
               user.
            
               Popup used in MJCBE interface.
               A map from the Mapping the Jewish Communities of the Byzantine empire
                  project with a small popup that provides additional information about a point on
                  the map.
               
            
            
            
               Popup used in Peripleo displaying signifiers of hyperlinks designed for
                  discovery use case.
               A map of the Holy Island of Lindisfarne. A popup fills most of the screen
                  providing more information about the Lindisfarne Castle.
               
            
         

            Visual features
            Of all the features of the web map component, the developer has the greatest control
               over vectors, coordinates displayed as markers and other shapes on the map. The
               vector data consumed by the web map component takes the point, polyline, and polygon
               forms that are known from GIS. The underlying geometry or coordinates are commonly
               encoded in WGS84: the most commonly used system for representing locations on the
               earth’s surface as latitude and longitude. These coordinates then sit within standard
               data structures designed to share geospatial data on the web that include formats
               such as GeoJSON, KML or the OGC’s Web Feature Service (WFS). For example, Peripleo is
               based on the Linked Places standard developed in association with the Pelagios
               Network. Some DH applications make the underlying datasets available for download,
               Pauleicia offers this ability providing opportunities for reuse . The coordinates and their associated attributes
               can be visualised in diverse ways. A vector dataset is created by modelling
               geographical characteristics of a research object or objects and metadata. Such
               characteristics include where the object was created, found or used, or some aspect
               of its content, broadly defined to include locations mentioned in text or depicted in
               art. Such geographical modelling is not self-evident or straightforward and the
               results subjective and partial . Visual
               communication of the critical relationship between research object and geometry is
               difficult. The difficulties in using Euclidean geometry to represent place has been
               extensively discussed in scholarship on GIS and other technologies 
               
               . The shortcomings of representing nuanced
               and complex humanities data within the simplistic demarcation of space that vector
               geometries provide should be a concern for the developer of a web map. However, the
               web map component offers significant flexibility to meet this challenge as most
               cartographic forms of representation can be rendered using standard technologies for
               rendering graphics in browsers including CSS, D3 or plugins .
            
               Issues in defining place using vectors. A visualisation of crowd-sourced
                  neighbourhood mapping from the Boston Neighbourhood Consensus project created by
                  Bostonography. By Andy Woodruff (https://andywoodruff.com) and Tim Wallace (https://www.nytimes.com/by/tim-wallace). (Source https://bostonography.com/2017/official-unofficial-neighborhoods-2017.
                  Used with the permission of the authors.)
               An map of Boston showing overlapping vectors that make it difficult to
                  define neighborhood boundaries.
               
            
            The representation of vectors should vary according to use case in terms of form and
               style. Web maps offer developers opportunities to configure symbol, shape, colour, or
               shade to represent attributes and support visual analysis. Users have experience of
               using particular styles for certain forms of visual analysis, for instance,
               choropleths in the case of electoral data. The division of a dataset into layers
               means vectors can be broken down into subsets where differences in representation
               might communicate relationships .
               Complexity of visual form might, however, obscure the affordance of clicking on a
               vector to retrieve attribute data. For example, the MJCBE interface styles vectors
               using opacity to help users understand spatial and temporal uncertainty in underlying
               data quickly . As more transparent vector symbols represent
               greater uncertainty styling obscures the ability to click on a vector’s
               representation. On the other hand, the simple style of Peripleo markers is intended
               to guide the user away from making visual comparisons between markers and towards
               clicking. This article does not attempt to provide a comprehensive guide to these
               options and their application. Rather, it urges the developer to consider intended
               use when choosing vector representation and not employ the familiar
               inverted-drop-shaped pin popularised by Google . 
            Whilst vectors should be the focus of any web map, tiles dominate the display space,
               setting the visual tone. Tiles provide an efficient and lightweight method of
               displaying and updating background maps in the browser based on zoom and pan
                  interactions. Tiles are requested individually based on zoom and pan
                  interactions before being joined seamlessly in the browser. Traditionally made up
                  of geolocated PNG images in 2025 tiles more often take the form of packets of
                  vectors. They are typically served using an HTTP geospatial standard such as Web
                  Map Tile Service (WMTS) defined by the OGC .
               Rendered as seamless and interactive images they support the familiar, slippy web map
               format. Many users will be familiar with those made available by commercial providers
               such as Bing, Google, or MapTiler alongside open offerings like OpenStreetMap. These
               tiles are often designed to support uses of web maps in society today that include
               navigation and information retrieval and reflect the commercial interests of
               providers. The wealth of tiles made available has been extensively researched outside
               the digital humanities. These tiles are created for particular purposes, for example
               to generate commercial revenue through advertising. Tiles are complex and
               multi-layered datasets meaning their production process is not always readily
               apparent , and biases in design make them
               unsuitable for particular user needs . Some are not
               representative or equitable and suffer from deficiencies including the representation
               of national borders  and poor coverage of the global
               south . The use of many sets of tiles is
               therefore problematic from political and ethical perspectives. Those offered by
               commercial providers are by no means the only type of tile that can be displayed
               within web map components, rather, they represent a default setting. In particular,
               those projects that examine the global south or adopt a global perspective should
               consider the alternative options outlined below. 
            Temporality is a critical consideration in the use of tiles in the digital humanities
               yet has been little discussed. Designed for use in today’s society, tiles generally
               depict current geography. Yet humanities research examines varied time periods making
               the use of many tiles anachronistic. Despite these concerns, such tiles are widely
               used in digital humanities projects: For example, more than 50 of 76 digital literary mapping projects used such online mapping services
               . The Mapping Islamaphobia and Power of
               Attorney in Oaxaca, Mexico projects introduced earlier implement tiles from ESRI and
               Carto that depict modern topography which is mainly obscured by dark shading,
               anachronistic in the case of the Power of Attorney in Oaxaca, Mexico project. The
               MJCBE interface uses Google tiles derived from satellite imagery. Current topography
               was intended to act as a corollary for topography of the past yet, despite limits
               placed on zoom to avoid users’ engagement with large scales, the tiles are
               anachronistic.
            
               Anachronistic use of tiles derived from satellite imagery to represent
                  Byzantine period topography in MJCBE interface.
               A map from the Mapping the Jewish Communities of the Byzantine empire
                  project showing anachronistic use of tiles.
               
            
            It is convenient to use tiles that display modern topography as they are packaged up
               as a service by commercial providers. The creation of tiles and the setup and
               maintenance of services is labour intensive, making bespoke implementations beyond
               the reach of many individual projects. Alternatives do exist such as tiles derived
               from individual digitised maps and made available through services like Allmaps  or the Georeferencer  or as
               seamless map layers created by stitching a published series of maps together . Whilst undoubtedly useful, and often a significant
               improvement, such digitised maps also embody a specific worldview and power dynamic.
               Many such maps were originally created for navigation and economic planning, to name
               two examples, and are entangled with historical processes including conflict,
               colonialism, or empire building. A welcome alternative for an earlier period is
               provided by the Consortium of Ancient World Mappers who offer tiles with worldwide
               coverage of topography with water levels adjusted at different dates . Peripleo offers an option within a JSON configuration file
               to configure the map instance to display selected tiles of choice. Those selected by
               default are provided by MapTiler, but guidance on adding the Consortium of Ancient
               World Mappers tiles is available in the form of some simple steps. The role and
               importance of tiles varies based on use case. Whilst vectors are the focus of visual
               analysis, tiles are also essential to recognising, interpreting, and deriving meaning
               from patterns. Therefore, the choice of tile is critical to guiding the user towards
               visual analysis. Tiles should be chosen to accentuate and to draw attention to
               markers, for example, by ensuring colours are complementary or that tiles are light
               in colour thus focusing attention on the markers. In the case of discovery, tiles are
               simply used for orientation, supporting the user to find, notice, or recognise a
               single vector. Familiarity with current geographical features like settlements might
               therefore be helpful and the anachronistic nature of many tilesets need not be
               detrimental to their use for discovery. 
         

            Projection
            Projection defines the display of vectors and their relationship to tiles making the
               choice of projection a critical consideration in designing any web map. A projection
               is a transformation of the three-dimensional earth onto a two-dimensional map. It is
               possible to use many different calculations to display or approximate the sphere that
               is the earth on a flat surface. That map projections should be
                  selected based on their appropriateness for the user’s data, the geographic area
                  being mapped, and the types of measurements that a reader might need to
                  make
                is a firmly established cartographic
               principle. Yet, in the vast majority of cases, web map components are setup to use
               the default spherical, pseudo, or Web Mercator projection known by the code EPSG:3857
                  . The deficiencies of the projection are
               well-documented in cartographic literature . Despite
               this critique, the projection has gained prominence in the twenty-first century on
               the web. Components including Leaflet, MapBoxGL, and Open Layers offer the
               opportunity to select from a range of possible projections either using selectors,
               plugins or bespoke code 
               
               . Yet these options are rarely used. Indeed, all of
               the projects introduced earlier are based on the Web Mercator projection.
            
               Three forms of map projection. After: Comparison of cartography surface
                  development. By Cmglee (https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Cmglee). (Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Comparison_of_cartography_surface_development.svg
                  Used under CC-BY-SA-4.0 license.)
               Comparison of cylindrical, conic and azimuthal map projections with standard
                  parallels shown.
               
            
            All projections require compromise, and in selecting a projection the cartographer must weigh distortion of area against the distortions
                  of angles, distances and directions
               . Designed to facilitate the calculation
               of bearings, the Mercator projection preserves angles, making it conformal. A
               simplified version has become standard in web maps based on a spherical earth model
               and differing from modern Mercator implementations used elsewhere that adopt the most
               accurate earth model available . The
                  earth is not a perfect sphere but rather is irregular. Advanced map projections
                  take this irregularity into account in their transformation. The projection
               offers significant technical advantages as its uninterrupted, cylindrical form
               expedites the creation of tiles and makes panning straightforward. Furthermore, the
               projection’s conformality means the calculations required to plot coordinates are
               less complex, a desideratum for web services where computational resources have been
               at a premium historically . Yet these advantages are
               predicated on compromises elsewhere, and, in the case of Web Mercator, such
               compromises include distortions to area, shape, and distance. Such distortions also
               vary depending on latitude. Higher latitudes suffer from increased area and shape
               distortions meaning that, for example, polygons that are the same area in pixels but
               located at different latitudes do not represent the same geographical area . The relationship between pixels and
               distance varies according to latitude and is proportional only along the equator . For instance, it is a common misconception that a
               straight line or loxodrome represents the shortest distance between two points rather
               than a great circle
               . Moreover, the simplification of the
               earth’s shape that underpins Web Mercator leads to further errors with positions
               portrayed up to 50km from their correct position at high latitudes . Finally, whilst the projection’s
               cylindrical nature facilitates east-west panning, interruption at the poles prevents
               readers from considering trans-polar routes, those that cross the northern and
               southern edges of the map, when estimating distances between points . Thus, the use of web maps based on the
               Mercator projection for estimation tasks such as comparing and measuring can lead to
                  incorrect assumptions about geographic distributions and
                  relationships
                as empirical studies have shown .
            
               Map of the world based on Mercator projection including indicatrices to
                  visualise local distortions to area. After: Mercator map of the world –
                  coastlines, graticule, and indicatrices. By Justin Kunimune (https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/User:Justinkunimune). (Source: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mercator_with_Tissot%27s_Indicatrices_of_Distortion.svg.
                  Used under CC-BY-SA-4.0 license.)
               A map of the world on a Mercator projection including indicatrices to
                  visualise local distortions to area.
               
            
            The impact of such compromises varies depending on the dataset in question and the
               intended use case. The distortions to distance, area, and shape necessary to preserve
               angles can have a deleterious effect on performing the synoptic task that underpins
               visual analysis. Distortions to relationships between vectors and tiles affect maps
               of certain scales more than others. The projection is suited to local geography over global comparison
                and small-scale maps, those that depict
               larger geographical areas such as parts of continents, are particularly affected.
               Visual analysis of any map where the zoom level is less than four according to the
               standard scale used by Leaflet, Google Maps Embed API, and others, is particularly
               problematic, and, in such cases, alternatives such as those that preserve area, like
               Equal Earth , or distance, like World Equidistant
               cylindrical , should be employed. The total latitude
               depicted on Mercator maps should be small and not include latitudes above around 60
               degrees. Any use of the component that includes a polar region would benefit from
               using a custom projection, for example, Antarctic Polar Stereographic . In addition to considering the region to be depicted
               carefully, the map creator should set limits on pan and zoom, to ensure that only map
               views with minimum distortion are depicted. Vectors and tiles used in the MJCBE
               interface are projected using Web Mercator. Vectors depicted on the map lie between
               the latitudes of 44.8 and 24.9 meaning differences in areal distortion between these
               latitudes are within reasonable limits. Furthermore, the distribution of vectors in
               terms of both latitude and longitude facilitates relatively accurate estimation of
               distance. Web Mercator arguably has benefits for the discovery use case where the
               focus is on locating a particular vector of interest. Familiar to many users, the
               shape of landmasses and cardinal directions meet preconceptions for how a map should
               look. Such familiarity expedites the recognition of known geographical areas,
               fostering an un-intimidating experience .
            The concept of distortion may not sit comfortably with humanities researchers
               for whom representation is inherently subjective. Yet over and above the mechanistic
               considerations previously outlined, the resulting social and political biases
               embodied in the distortions of the Mercator projection and its history cannot be
               ignored. The inflation of particular landmasses such as western Europe at the expense
               of areas of Africa and Asia came under attack in critical cartographic discourse in
               the twentieth century. This was not only because such inflation renders maps
               unsuitable for particular purposes but also because the distortion replicates
               perceived Western cultural hegemony. In the later twentieth century, this
               reassessment was taken up as part of the wider post-colonial critique, leading to a
               significant decline in the projection’s use in print maps such as atlases . Despite this welcome earlier change, the
               explosion in web mapping has led to a resurgence in the use of the Mercator
               projection, a trend that has been the subject of some critical discussion 
               
               . 
            Implementations of the web map component, including by the author of this article in
               co-designing both the Peripleo and MJCBE interfaces, have ignored decades of
               cartographic reflection on the projection’s political implications. The author has
               been unable to locate any projects in the digital humanities that use alternative
               projections within a web map component. Where alternatives projections have been
               implemented the maps used are either static or bespoke implementations based on the
               use of canvas or SVG elements with D3 for example. Examples of such maps include:
            
               The Spread of U.S. Slavery, 1790–1860 .
               The Atlantic slave trade in two minutes .
               Die politische Landkarte Europas Digitaler Atlas zur Geschichte Europas seit.
                  1500 Static maps .
               SlaveVoyages static maps taken from Atlas of the
                     Transatlantic Slave Trade
                  .
            
            What might account for the lack of alternative projections in web map components?
               Platforms developed by technology companies including Google’s MyMaps or Carto offer
               a straightforward route to making interactive maps available by uploading a
               spreadsheet 
               . These platforms account for many, if not the majority,
               of digital humanities projects but they do not offer straightforward alternatives to
               Web Mercator. Thus, there is often a requirement to write bespoke code to implement
               different projections and the appearance of some tiles within a web map component can
               deteriorate when reprojected at particular scales. Yet these barriers are by no means
               insurmountable as many of the web map components that are available in 2024 offer the
               ability to display maps in different projections 
               . For example, Open Layers is open source and only
               requires minor changes in configuration to change the display projection. Although
               there are technical barriers, a lack of cartographic knowledge also prevents the use
               of alternatives. Calls for an ethical visualisation workflow have urged humanists and
               developers alike to consider the larger contextual framing and
                  the story that it tells employing a critical
                  perspective on the power of individual design elements
               . The popularity of web maps arguably
               makes the Web Mercator projection the most widely used design element in digital
               humanities visualisation. If any community possesses the knowledge and critical
               skills to think beyond the confines of a default setting it should be digital
               humanists. In 2025, the barriers to implementing alternative projections are lower
               than ever before. Web maps developed in the digital humanities would be much improved
               by thinking through projections creatively.
         

            Concluding remarks
            The user-centred approach adopted by this article has led to a set of recommendations
               for designing web maps to support the two use cases. Designing for the discovery use
               case supports finding and accessing research objects and draws on researchers’
               experience of using web maps elsewhere. Discovery aligns with the priorities of the
               creators of digital research objects including research projects and cultural
               heritage organisations who are interested in maximising the use of web pages through
               usage metrics and usability studies. Collections of research objects and the
               resulting datasets are palimpsests of decisions; their partial, subjective nature
               might not be suitable for collective interpretation. Designing for discovery can
               guide the user away from visual analysis and help projects and organisations to
               present a breadth of research objects. This article suggests that the implementation
               of web maps for visual analysis requires careful thought. The design of visual
               features such as vectors, tiles, and projection should be considered in relation to
               the dataset and aims of the project. These aims do appear to be unclear for many
               projects for which simply making a map available appears to be the main goal. The
               article’s perspective on visual analysis has been cultivated in response to the
               author’s work on MJCBE. Here, the web map component and associated interactive
               functionality were designed to support visual analysis. Yet use of the interface for
               this purpose has not proven straightforward and relies on significant background
               knowledge of the Byzantine empire. There have been few citations that record usage of
               the MJCBE interface for its intended purpose in the decade since release which raises
               the question of how to measure the success or effectiveness of web maps in the visual
               analysis use case. This article does not argue that every web map could be designed
               exclusively for visual analysis or discovery. Maps might serve both purposes or
               others such as the visualisation of a single narrative, journey, or marker or
               offering access to statistical information such as calculating routes in the past
                  
               . Rather, considering both use cases in relation to
               modelling of data and an intended audience of users represents a useful exercise in
               planning and design. 
            Future work, encompassing a systematic investigation of more projects that have used
               web map components could categorise implementations in terms of their data type,
               theme or subject, vector representation, and other characteristics leading to further
               definitions of use cases. The article has adopted a mechanistic or instrumentalist
               perspective focused on activities, tasks, and features – a perspective which might be
               considered to be at odds with recent digital humanities literature that persuasively
               argues for a reconsideration of the task-based or goal-oriented paradigm that has
               pervaded user experience or visualisation research 
               . Yet characteristics of the web map component itself
               justify the article’s perspective. Its intended and primary usage is mobility,
               planning and navigation within the physical environment. Researchers will bring
               learned behaviours of task-based use to any web map, and the discovery activity
               aligns with such experience of using web maps elsewhere. The article argues that if
               the component is used for visual analysis, the developer must consider the wider use
               of web maps, as processes of knowing through interpretative work
                  … are also the expression of particular circumstances of production
               . Whilst the article is titled Designing for Discovery, developing signifiers of the
               potential for visual analysis is just as important. The need for alternative methods
               of visualisation has been stressed over the last decade under the suggestion that
                  data visualizations have depended on impoverished methods…
                  current practices of reductive graphs and standard charts have debased
                  interpretation, made it simplistic and literal. We know better and can do
                  more
               . The web map component’s constrained set of
               features, two-dimensional visualisation and flat and tightly-defined data model call
               into question its suitability for many forms of open-ended, enjoyable or playful
               exploration. For example, possible user journeys are limited leading narrative or
               story maps to often rely on several different maps. 
            Alternative methods of creating maps on the web offer greater flexibility. Bespoke
               maps based on Canvas or SVG are commonly used in fields such as data journalism and
               alternative forms suggested in the digital humanities include the space-time cube
                   or deep maps . Yet
               these alternatives require greater effort and expertise to deploy. Whilst the web map
               component’s simplicity has led to its proliferation such simplicity also has
               disadvantages in terms of flexibility. The technology cannot be used to create the
               varied maps available in GIS or more flexible web technologies. Moreover, ease of
               deployment hampers thinking processes leading to a lack of spatial literacy or
               reasoning 
               . The developer is completely separated
               from the inner workings of the component, installing the user at
                  a level of abstraction far above whatever theoretical claims might lie
                  beneath
               . This separation has stymied the process of
               critical thinking and experimentation for both user and creator that is valued in the
               digital humanities 
               . Tutorials based on the component
               emphasise skills related to web technologies which, whilst undoubtedly useful, are
               offered at the expense of cartographic knowledge or GIScience. Implementation has
               been driven by technology and not the open-ended and complex questions that
               humanities scholars ask. By looking beyond the web map component digital humanists
               have the means to transform the role of geography in the humanities research
               process.
         

            Acknowledgements
            Thanks to members of the Locating a National Collection project team, especially
               Rainer Simon, Stephen Gadd and Leif Isaksen, and to the Arts and Humanities Research
               Council for funding the project and the development of Peripleo (Grant No.
               AH/T01119X/1). Thanks also to the Mapping the Jewish Communities of the Byzantine
               Empire project team, Nicholas de Lange, Alexander Panayotov and especially Fredrik
               Palm for productive discussions and to the European Research Council for their
               funding. The Pelagios Commons project generously supported the Web Maps-T hack event
               held in 2019 and conversations with the participants provided insights into many of
               the issues outlined here. Furthermore, the partners of the Pelagios Network have been
               a source of inspiration for several years now. Finally thanks to Victoria Morris at
               the British Library and Andy Woodruff and Tim Wallace from Bostonography for their
               kind permission to use their data and images.
         
