Title:  Topological properties of music collaboration networks:
          The case of Jazz and Hip Hop
Volume:  015
Issue:  1
Date:  05 March 2021
Abstract:  
        Studying collaboration in music is a prominent area of research in fields such as
          cultural studies, history, and musicology. For scholars interested in studying
          collaboration, network analysis has proven to be a viable methodological approach. Yet, a
          challenge is that heterogeneous data makes it difficult to study collaboration networks
          across music genres, which means that there are almost only studies on individual genres.
          To solve this problem, we propose a generalizable approach to studying the topological
          properties of music collaboration networks within and between genres that relies on data
          from the freely available Discogs database. To illustrate the approach, we provide a
          comparison of the genres Jazz and Hip Hop.
      
Full Body Text: 

        1. Introduction: Collaboration in the Music Scene
        The enormous increase in machine-readable data has been one of the main drivers of the
          digital humanities in recent years. This new data enables new, computer-aided approaches
            , both from an exploratory and an empirical
          perspective. So far, the focus of digitization has been mainly on textual sources. Still,
          as more and more musical data is becoming available in digital form, we are witnessing an
          increase in music information retrieval applications  within
          the digital humanities. Work in this area is rather heterogeneous, but may be divided into
          two main branches: (1) 'sound and audio studies', where music is processed and analyzed as
          an actual audio signal, and (2) 'symbolic music studies', where music is analyzed from a
          more formalized perspective, as it is written down in some kind of notation system.
          Typically, the latter branch is dedicated to questions such as digitization of analog
          music scores (optical music recognition), music representation formats (MusicXML, MEI,
          etc.), and the quantitative analysis of musical features (e.g., melodic similarity). As
          symbolic music collections are widely available, this branch of music studies seems to be
          particularly well suited for quantitative analyses. One specific subcategory of symbolic
          music is music metadata, which comes in many shapes and sizes, for instance, in the form
          of audio features (danceability, energy, etc.) via the Spotify APISpotify API https://developer.spotify.com/documentation/web-api/reference/tracks/get-audio-features/;
            Note: All URLs mentioned in this article were last checked July 7, 2020. or as
          metadata about artists, genres, etc. (Last.fm).
        In this work, we propose the use of the Discogs database to study patterns and strategies
          of music collaboration. The larger theme that motivates this research is the importance of
          collaborative contexts for problem-solving, creativity, and innovation in general , the latter two of which are particularly important in the field
          of music production. Teitelbaum et al.  note that music is one of the richest sources of interaction between
            individuals, i.e., music collaboration between artists is a common social
          phenomenon. However, the concrete strategies of collaboration, such as the role of
          particular artists as hubs and the formation of communities, may vary widely between
          genres. This is illustrated by a large body of existing studies on music collaboration
          across different genres, including Classical Music
          
          
          Pop Music
          
          
          Heavy Metal
          , Rap/Hip Hop
          
          
           and, above all, Jazz
          
          
          
          
          
          
          .
        Typical research questions that are investigated in the above studies are, for instance,
          the analysis of structural properties of collaboration networks (e.g., small worlds) 
           or the study of local scenes / regional communities in the
          respective genres 
          . The methods used in these studies are very diverse, as they
          include qualitative approaches (i.e., interviews) as well as quantitative approaches. When
          it comes to quantitative approaches, the predominant method is network analysis, which is
          well known in many related fields of application. Examples include analyzing collaboration
          between Hollywood actors 
          , scientists , or business alliances
            . Within the sub-genre of network analyses of music
          collaboration, we also find a multitude of different datasets used in existing studies.
          However, most of them only collect small amounts of data, are limited to a single
          timeframe, genre, or geographic area, and work with diverse understandings of the concept
          of "collaboration". These differences in methods and data make it very difficult to
          investigate collaboration strategies between different genres of music on a wider range.
          With a few exceptions , there are hardly any studies that
          compare different genres in terms of their cooperation strategies and networks. Yet
          comparative studies are particularly exciting, as they allow scholars to work out specific
          topological patterns of different genres and discuss them in relation to artistic
          characteristics, especially with regard to creativity and innovation.
        For this reason, we propose a reusable digital humanities approach for studying
          topological properties of music collaboration networks within and between genres that may
          pave the way for further, more comprehensive comparative studies in the field of music
          cooperation. Since we use metadata from the Discogs database, we have to limit our data
          set to collaborations between artists that are explicitly documented by a joint release.
          In this work, we also perform an actual comparison of two genres to illustrate our
          proposed method. We picked Jazz and Hip Hop for two reasons. The first is the existing
          scholarship about the two genres, which provides important context for interpreting the
          results of network analysis. The second is that the two genres are known for sharing a
          similar approach to collaboration, for single artists are often collaborating in varying
          constellations. Yet, their collaboration networks are rarely compared. Not only is network
          analysis a particularly amenable method to studying the style of collaboration that are
          prominent in Jazz and Hip Hop communities, but the method also provides a way to compare
          the two genres in new ways.
      

        2. Collaboration in Jazz and Hip Hop
        To back up our comparison on collaboration in Jazz and Hip Hop, this section introduces
          some basic characteristics of both genres and also provides an overview of some of the
          most prominent related work in this area.
        
          2.1 Jazz
          Studying collaborations in the genre of Jazz seems to be the most prominent stretch of
            research in existing work on music collaboration. This can mainly be attributed to the
            extensive amount of collaboration within this genre. Unlike in other genres, such as
            Rock, where fixed groups are the most common form of collaboration, Jazz musicians
            usually play and record in constellations. Real-time Jazz performances themselves are
            highly interactive and collaborative, as musicians typically react to each other and
            improvise while sticking to a common framework with regard to tempo and harmonics . This fluid nature makes Jazz a prime research interest for
            social network analysis in the music domain, as the resulting networks tend to be rather
            complex. In the existing related work on Jazz collaborations, researchers use very
            different types of data, ranging from archival and biographical sources to existing
            collections of metadata on the genre.
          One notable dataset on Jazz collaborations is called Linked Jazz. In an attempt to
            create an in-depth network dataset, Pattuelli et al. 
            construct an ontology from digital archive material on Jazz history, more specifically
            transcripts of interviews with 12 Jazz musicians. Their resulting network includes 952
            connections between those interviewees and 529 other Jazz artists. In more recent
            versions of their dataset, over 2,000 Jazz musicians with over 3,600 connections are
            included. While personal recollections of Jazz musicians are probably the most accurate
            source of data when it comes to making connections that actually represent the real
            world, this approach has two major disadvantages. First, it is difficult to make
            generalizable statements, since only a very limited number of musicians are considered.
            Although such data sets may be interesting from a historical perspective, they are not
            suitable as a basis for empirical statements on the structure of collaboration in Jazz.
            Second, the actual data acquisition entails a lot of work, as the qualitative data
            source is not readily available in a structured format.
          The Red Hot Jazz Archive, as
            used by Gleiser and Danon , is another example of existing
            resources on collaborations in Jazz. It contains information about Jazz bands between
            1895 to 1929, listing the members and discographies for 1,099 bands. It also provides
            more detailed biographical information for 192 musicians. The data was compiled manually
            from a variety of sources, such as oral histories, biographies, and several historical
            books on the Jazz culture of that era. The Red Hot Jazz Archive was created
            in a similar way to the Linked Jazz database, which means it also shares
            some of the previously described problems, namely the lack of generalizability and the
            time-consuming preparation of the dataset. The authors use a two-stage process to
            examine Jazz collaborations based on this archive. First, they infer a network of
            individual artists, which are connected if they played in the same band. From there on,
            they create a network of bands, with two bands being connected if they share at least
            one member. Studying both networks topologically with respect to degree distributions,
            clustering, and average nearest neighbor degree, they note two major limitations of
            their network model: artists may be credited with different spellings or under
            pseudonyms, and relations between artists are not time-stamped, which makes the analysis
            of the evolution of networks over time impossible.
          In addition to the use of historical documents, another popular approach for the
            generation of collaboration networks is to use metadata collections of music releases.
            Hannibal  provides an extensive overview of the evolution
            of Jazz as a genre and the collaboration patterns associated with it based on a network
            obtained from Tom Lord's The Jazz
                Discography. While this dataset is deemed comprehensive (Phillips and
            Kim, 2009), as it contains data from 410,000 Jazz releases, it is not license-free and
            only available at a high price. In the corresponding network, musicians who recorded an
            album together are connected via an undirected edge. Each edge is tagged with the year
            of recording. This method of network creation requires very little manual work and yet
            results in comprehensive and metadata-rich networks. Hannibal  uses the network to explore career success and historical
            significance of musicians in relation to their position in the network by using
            different metrics such as centrality, brokerage, and closure, which he relates to
            measures of career success (e.g., awards and sales). He presents empirical evidence that
            Jazz musicians who perform in closed groups are less likely to have a successful career
            than those who maintain a more open structure of collaborative connections.
          In another related research paper, Giaquinto et al.  use
            the AllMusic database to infer
            a network that connects Jazz musicians according to their similarity as determined by
            the database, to study which artists were most influential. However, their network size
            is far from comprehensive, including only 418 artists at most. Finally, Filippova et al.
               provide a web service called Map of
              Jazz, which can be used for an explorative search for Jazz musicians based on
            collaboration network data.Map of
                Jazz They aim to provide a tool to make discographies more accessible
            for researchers, as large-scale discography data can be difficult to analyze in the
            classic textual form. Their network is based on discographical data that was manually
            compiled from a multitude of sources, ranging from musical records and magazines to
            biographical data and monographs. Overall, 11,824 musicians are included. A major
            difference to other works is that their network is dynamic, which includes metadata
            about the time and place of connections. However, their work is mostly concerned with
            tool development and provides little descriptive insight into the network's
            properties.
        
        
          2.2 HipHop
          Hip Hop is another promising genre when it comes to collaborations. In her book on Hip
            Hop culture and the role of collaboration, Smith  notes that
              [f]rom it's outset in the 1970s, hip-hop was not solely a musical
              genre, but encompassed dance (b-boying/b-girling) and visual art (graffiti).
            In other words, Hip Hop was and is a cultural phenomenon with many facets, of which
            music is only one aspect. According to Smith , collaboration
            in Hip Hop is an essential mechanism for interaction and communication of shared
            ideologies, attitudes, and behaviors within the scene. Compared to Jazz, there is
            substantially less work that deals with music collaborations in Hip Hop.
          The most comprehensive study of collaboration in Hip Hop is provided by Smith , who presents an interesting approach by examining the metadata
            of over 30,000 songs extracted from lyrics databases. Since all artists who have had a
            vocal part in a song are listed in the metadata of the songs, a connection can be
            established between any artists that appear together on a song. Similar to Gleiser and
            Danon , name standardization is also a problem in this
            study. Smith uses a fuzzy search algorithm to partly match different spellings of names.
            However, if the same artist is credited under a different pseudonym altogether, the
            standardization fails. Another related work examines the collaboration network of a
            single artist . More concretely, the authors try to model the
            evolution of DJ Khaled with respect to collaborations by building an
            incremental network for each of his albums. This network is then used to identify
            communities as well as influential artists who affected the music of DJ Khaled the
            most.
        
        
          2.3 Interim conclusion
          The related work presented in this section illustrates the multitude of different data
            sources that are used for studying music collaboration. These are typically accompanied
            by a broad range of methods for inferring network structure from the data. Several
            limitations arise as a result of this: (1) most datasets are only available via
            inference from noisy data, with associated problems in data cleaning; (2) while
            comprehensive network and collaboration datasets exist for Jazz, sources for other
            genres, for instance, Hip Hop, are rather scarce; (3) there is no common method for
            establishing links between musicians that is applicable to all genres and analytical
            settings.
          While datasets used to study music collaboration are very diverse, we found only little
            variation when it comes to network metrics in the related work studies: the most
            prominent metrics are degree distribution, degree correlations, average nearest neighbor
            degree, betweenness centrality, clustering coefficient, and transitivity score. The
            Girvan-Newman partitioning algorithm seems to be a popular choice to identify
            (sub-)communities in the networks. As all of the above-mentioned papers provide
            different results for these metrics, the results cannot be directly compared with each
            other in order to gain insight about structural differences in collaboration between
            genres, since the underlying networks are not derived in the same way. Therefore, we
            will now propose a method for how to address these challenges and hope they open up a
            path for cross-genre network analysis.
        
      

        3. Methodology
        In this section, we present our approach for the generic study of music collaborations
          across different genres. First, we explain our considerations when modeling the network
          graph. Next, we give an overview of the network metrics used and a brief explanation of
          how they can be interpreted for the analysis of music collaborations. Finally, we
          introduce the underlying Discogs dataset.
        
          3.1 Network Modeling
          When building a network, it is essential to define what constitutes an entity (node)
            and what constitutes a connection (edge) between these nodes. The challenge is to find a
            definition that, on the one hand, is applicable to a variety of research questions and,
            on the other hand, correctly reflects the underlying connections in the real world. In
            order to establish a common methodological approach to network structure, the dataset
            created as part of this work is concerned with connections between individual musicians.
            This is common in the field 
            
            , as the individual artist is the "least common denominator"
            across genres in terms of organizational structure. While Big Band Jazz can have group
            sizes of up to 170 musicians (e.g., Paul Whitman and his Orchestra), Hip
            Hop, for instance, is much more centered around the individual artist (e.g., Snoop
              Dogg), and larger groupings of artists are the exception (e.g., The
              Wu-Tang ClanNote: All members of the Wu-Tang Clan are also active as solo
              artists.), not the norm.
          There are several options available to establish connections between nodes, all
            different with respect to their weighting, direction, and sparseness. When studying
            collaboration, the edges are supposed to represent a collaborative process shared
            between the two connected nodes. With music records being the main available data source
            to infer these connections, one choice is to establish edges between all artists that
            appear together on a record. The main advantage of a release-centered approach over
            alternative methods – such as the definition of an edge between two artists being if
            they are part of the same band or collective  – is the
            possibility to assign different weights to the connections. We may well assume that
            artists who recorded more tracks together have a strong creative influence on each
            other. Therefore, the network edges are weighted by the number of collaborations.
          However, an apparent problem here is that a music release is usually a collection of
            different tracks, and these tracks are not always recorded with the same set of
            musicians. Therefore, if only album-wide credits are available, not all of the listed
            musicians can automatically be assumed to have shared a collaborative process, violating
            the hypothesized definition of edges. The only person that is connected to all other
            credited artists with a high probability is the main artists of the release. This
            problem can be tackled in two different ways: (1) create connections between all
            credited artists, on at the cost of possibly introducing unwarranted ones; or (2) only
            create connections between credited artists and the main artist of the album, thus only
            creating warranted connections at the cost of missing some. Several factors should be
            considered in this decision: first, it can be theorized that the amount of missed
            connections in the latter case is higher than the number of unwarranted ones in the
            former since, for a high proportion of releases, a big subset of credited artists
            appeared on all tracks of an album. Accordingly, the data/noise trade-off seems
            favorable when adding all possible connections to the network.
          Another relevant factor is the metrics that will be used to derive conclusions from the
            network data, especially metrics measuring network centrality. The first option would
            place higher network importance on primary artists, as they would receive a
            disproportionally high amount of connections. Also, this approach invalidates metrics
            that operate on notions of transitivity, such as the clustering coefficient, since the
            transitive edges are explicitly excluded from the dataset if the credited artists are
            not interconnected. Therefore, we opt to include all possible connections between the
            artists associated with a release. This is also the most common approach 
            
            . Since no information can be derived about the direction of
            collaborative influence from simple co-appearance on tracks, the network can be assumed
            to be undirected. However, to incorporate relevant information about the concrete role
            each musician has played on a record (i.e., instruments, vocals, producing roles, etc.),
            we relied on two parallel directed edges (see Figure 1).
            These connections can be interpreted as x played with
                y in role a and as a parallel edge y played with x in role
            b, where x and y are two connected
            musicians, and a and b are instruments or other musical roles.
            This information about the specific roles of musicians on a record can later be used to
            filter the data and create tailored sub-networks that – for instance – might only
            include edges representing piano players or producers. Besides the option to select
            specific nodes in the data set via their role annotations, we treat these directed
            parallel edges as a single undirected edge when we apply our network metrics (see next
            section) for the analysis of music collaborations.
          
            The two corresponding network models. The parallel directed model is used to
              annotate metadata in the network, with two edges representing a single connection in
              the undirected model.
            
          
          As for the metadata about the connections, various additional collaboration information
            can be provided. To allow for the creation of dynamic networks and insights into
            historical questions, each edge is dated with the release year of the record. This has a
            drawback, as noted by Hannibal , who time-stamped the
            collaboration with the year of the recording session, not the year of the album release:
            individual songs may have been released publicly years after the recording took place.
            However, detailed recording session data may not be publicly available for genres apart
            from Jazz. In the interest of deriving a common network modeling method across multiple
            genres, we decided to use the album release date.
        
        
          3.2 Metrics
          In the following section, the metrics used for network analysis are described. For each
            metric, we provide a short description of how the metric is calculated and what insight
            can be derived from it regarding the collaboration networks at hand. For a more formal
            and in-depth description of common network metrics, see, for example, Newman .
          
            3.2.1 Degree
            The degree of a node is the number of incoming and outgoing edges a node has. The
              neighborhood of a node is thus given by all other nodes it is connected to. Applied to
              the undirected music collaboration networks at hand, the degree is the number of other
              musicians an individual has collaborated with, and the neighborhood is the set of all
              those musicians. The average degree and the overall distribution of degrees gives
              insight into the collaboration frequencies of musicians in that genre. In addition,
              this work looks at the degree variance and degree distribution in order to see whether
              the network mostly revolves around highly connected artists or if the whole network
              tends to be closely connected.
          
          
            3.2.2 Power-law scaling exponent
            For numerous types of networks, it can be observed that a small number of nodes have
              a large number of connections to other nodes, i.e., a high degree, while the majority
              of nodes have a rather low degree. Networks that exhibit this property are commonly
              referred to as scale-free networks . In these networks, the number of nodes that have
              a certain number of links is related to the degree of these nodes, such that the
              degree distribution of the network is a power-law distribution with a scaling exponent
              α. Typically, α is in the range of 2 ≤ α ≤ 3, although in some cases, values outside
              this range can be observed .
            Scale-free characteristics can be observed for a wide range of real-world networks,
              especially social and collaborative networks. It has been hypothesized that they form
              due to two major properties: growth and preferential attachment. Since these networks
              grow naturally, nodes that are introduced at an earlier stage have a higher chance of
              developing connections, hence boosting their degree. Similarly, preferential
              attachment means that establishing links reinforce a positive bias toward the
              connected nodes, as a node of high degree (also called "hub") seems to be more
              attractive to establish connections with, in turn, attracting more future connections
                . In the collaborative network at hand, these central
              hubs signify highly influential musicians. By investigating whether the degree
              distribution follows a power law, we can apply these characteristics to music
              collaboration networks, allowing for hypotheses to be derived about the origins of
              success for musicians.
          
          
            3.2.3 Degree correlation 
            The degree correlation is defined as the Pearson correlation coefficient ρ of the
              degrees of nodes connected by an edge , specifying if edges
              tend to be formed between nodes of similar or dissimilar degree. This parameter
              provides insight into the networks connectivity structure by specifying whether the
              network is assortative (nodes mainly connect to nodes with a similar degree, ρ >
              0), disassortative (there is a systematic disparity in degree between connected nodes,
              ρ < 0), or neutral (connections are random, ρ ≈ 0). In the networks at hand,
              assortative would mean that musicians with lots of connections to other musicians tend
              to collaborate with individuals who exhibit the same characteristic. Disassortative
              signifies that those well-connected musicians tend to collaborate more with
              less-connected musicians. Neutral would mean that musicians of high and low degrees
              frequently collaborate in an intermixed fashion, with no apparent general trend.
          
          
            3.2.4 Average nearest neighbor degree
            The average nearest neighbor degree (ANND)  of a node is
              the average degree of all nodes in its direct neighborhood. In weighted networks, each
              neighboring nodes' degree can be weighted by the weight of the edge connecting it.
              This value is computed individually for all nodes of a degree k, and then
              averaged over all nodes of that degree, a process that is repeated for all values of
                k present in the network. This results in the value being a function of
                k and providing additional information about the assortative properties
              of the network.
            In assortative networks, the average neighbor degree is increasing for larger values
              of k, decreasing in disassortative networks, and constant when the
              network has neutral mixing. While the degree correlation captures the general network
              trend in a single value for all nodes, the ANND extends the insight into the local
              structure by further specifying for which nodes the correlation occurs, as the ANND is
              a function of k. Furthermore, Pearson's degree correlation has been shown
              to depend on the size of the network, an issue that the average neighbor degree does
              not face . As we deal with large networks, we compute the
              average neighbor degree in addition to the degree correlation to complement the
              interpretation of the assortative properties of music collaboration given by the
              degree correlation.
          
          
            3.2.5 Mean local clustering coefficient
            The mean local clustering coefficient  is a measure of how
              complete the nodes in a network are connected to each other. This notion of
              completeness is based on the idea of triangles forming in the neighborhood of a node:
              when two nodes in the neighborhood are in turn connected to each other, the network is
              more tightly knit. The local clustering of a node is thus given by the ratio of
              triangles that exist to all possible triangles in its neighborhood. The mean local
              clustering coefficient is then defined as the mean of all local clustering
              coefficients. Applied to the collaborative nature of our network, a higher clustering
              coefficient would indicate that musicians that share a common collaborator are likely
              to collaborate with each other too, facilitating the exchange of creative ideas
              throughout the genre.
          
          
            3.2.6 Transitivity score
            A network's transitivity score, also called global clustering coefficient, is another
              metric describing the connectedness of the network . In
              contrast to the local clustering coefficient, it characterizes the whole network by
              applying the notion of complete triangles vs. possible triangles to all edges in the
              graph on a global, instead of a local level. Similar to the mean local clustering
              coefficient, this metric provides insight into the transitive properties of the
              network. In our case, such a transitive relation can be expressed as "if musician A
              recorded together with musician B, and musician B with musician C, chances are high
              that A and C also recorded music together". The transitivity scores in social networks
              tend to be rather high , especially in collaborative
              networks: for music, in particular, Smith gives a value of C = 0.18; in
              other applications such as a network of film actor collaborations, we have similar
              values: C = 0.20 . For our formalization of a
              network, these scores (and also the local clustering coefficients) are expected to be
              even higher. Since we add a fully connected subgraph for each music record (which in
              itself has a transitivity score of 1), and if the number of artists on a given record
              is high, the transitivity score of the whole network is boosted in turn.
          
        
        
          3.3 Data
          The Discogs database is the largest openly accessible collection of crowdsourced
            metadata of music releases , yet it is less commonly used
            for research purposes. Discogs
            currently lists over 12 million music releases from 6.7 million artists on nearly 1.5
            million music labels. Metadata for existing and new releases is continuously entered,
            checked, and curated by over 500,000 registered users. A voting
            system is used to rate the accuracy and completeness of data.See: https://support.discogs.com/hc/en-us/articles/360005055593-Database-Guidelines-20-Voting-Guidelines
            For each item, a vast variety of metadata can be specified, ranging from standard fields
            such as title, label, genre, and artists to fine-grained information, such as
            contributing musicians by track, issued versions of a master release or trivia. This
            allows researchers to describe virtually any type of audio recording ever released in
            great detail. For many releases, a list of the contributing musicians collaborating on
            the release, as well as their information about their collaboration role, is
            provided.
          Discogs provides complete dumps of their whole database that are updated on a monthly
            basis. The data is licensed under CC0, so
            there are no restrictions placed on the use of the data, which makes it a perfect data
            resource for research. All data in this project was obtained from a Discogs Data dump
            from October 9th, 2019.https://data.discogs. Based on this data, we created a collaboration
            network by defining an edge between the artist and each collaborator if they appear
            together on the same release. This process uses the Discogs ID of each person associated
            with the release, so even if an artist uses a pseudonym, the correct link is created in
            the network. Only releases which have exactly one genre listed in their metadata were
            considered for the network. In this way, only intra-genre collaborations are modeled.
            While there is an immense amount of inter-genre collaboration, the main objective of
            this study was to search for structural differences within genres.
          For every entry in the database, Discogs readily provides a label denoting its data
            quality. We only included releases that have the status accepted
            (indicating duplicates, etc.) and a data quality higher or equal to
            correct, to ensure a high quality in our derived network dataset. All
            relations that have a non-musical role, such as cover design, were omitted.
            Following the role categories defined by Discogshttps://www.discogs.com/help/creditslist, only roles from the
            categories vocals, instruments,
            dj mix, remix, and beats were deemed as valid, as
            these categories include the actual musicians involved in creating the music on the
            release. Finally, metadata about nodes (artists) and edges (collaborations) was added.
            Nodes with the Discogs IDs 194 and 355 with all associated edges were deleted manually, as these
            IDs were only database placeholders and did not link to any artist. For each node, the
            Discogs artist ID and the name were included. For each edge, the year, role, and Discogs
            release ID were included. All data was parsed using Python, and the networks were exported to a GraphML file . Network metrics were calculated using the networkx package for Python . In addition, the Python package power-law was
            used to calculate the power-law exponent . Finally, Gephi
             was used for graph visualizations.
        
      

        4. Results and Discussion
        
          4.1 Dataset
          Table 1 provides an overview of the network details that
            were derived for the genres Jazz and Hip Hop, using the previously described method on
            Discogs metadata. We only include releases with the highest tiers of the data quality
            label provided by Discogs, which indicates correctness and completeness based on a
            crowdsourced voting system. Thus, we ensure that only verified information is
            considered. Also, Discogs counts each issue and repress of the same album as a separate
            release, but provides a meta grouping in the form of a so-called master release,
            grouping together all the versions of an album. Since the metadata (at least the data
            relevant to our research) is consistently the same across all versions of such a master
            release, we based our data extraction on those. These two facts combined account for us
            using only a seemingly low number of releases, given the immense amount of available
            data.
          Using our proposed method, we derive the most comprehensive, freely accessible network
            dataset on music collaboration to date, both in terms of spanned timeframe and included
            artists. Before carrying out analyses and calculating metrics, each network was
            converted to a single-edge, undirected graph by combining all the parallel edges between
            two nodes into one weighted edge, with its weight being the sum of merged edges. If six
            parallel directed edges exist as a result of two musicians collaborating on three
            records, those are replaced by a single undirected edge of weight six.
          
            Network characteristics for Jazz and Hip Hop as extracted from Discogs
              metadata
            
              
              Artists
              Relations
              Parsed releases
              Timespan
            
            
              Hip Hop
              23098
              338200
              12301
              1979 - 2019
            
            
              Jazz
              40296
              3488662
              21808
              1917 - 2019
            
          
        
        
          4.2 Jazz Collaboration
          Figure 2 summarizes the most important descriptive network
            statistics for our Jazz network. To put those numbers into context, we also provide the
            results of the earlier cited study of Gleiser and Danon ,
            providing comparable statistics for their network analysis. As Gleiser and Danon's data
            is based on biographical information from 192 musicians, their network is much smaller.
            The newly generated Discogs network is over thirty times larger in terms of recorded
            musicians and includes about fourteen times more connections. The data spans nearly 100
            years of Jazz history, providing much more comprehensive insight into the historical
            development of the genre.
          
            Comparison of descriptive statistics of different our Discogs Jazz network and the
              existing Linked Jazz network by . n – number of nodes in
              the network, m – number of undirected edges, d̅ – average degree per node, c̅ – mean
              local clustering coefficient, C – transitivity score, ρ – degree correlation
              coefficient, α – power-law scaling exponent 
            
              
              n
              m
              d̅
              c̅
              C
              ρ
              α
            
            
              Discogs Jazz network
              40294
              569562
              28.27
              0.80
              0.32
              0.26
              1.53
            
            
              Linked Jazz network 
              1275
              38326
              60.4
              0.89
              -
              0.05
              -
            
          
          As shown in Table 2, the Discogs Network, with an average
            degree of 28.27 connections per musician, is considerably less dense compared to the Linked
            Jazz network. This disparity could be explained by the fact that Gleiser and Danon's
            network is generated from biographical information from the years 1895 to 1929. During
            this time, Jazz is characterized by larger collectives of musicians, as it coincides
            with the musical styles of New Orleans Jazz, Dixieland Jazz, and Chicago Jazz. In modern
            Jazz, a larger variety of group sizes is found, with an inclination towards solo artists
            and trios . Consequently, a node in the network of Gleiser and
            Danon is more likely to have more connections, as the band size at the time was
            comparatively large, introducing a higher number of connections. Deriving data from oral
            recollections further facilitates that the network consists of one large coherent
            component. If, in contrast, the network was based on music releases, smaller clusters
            only representing one album would appear that are not connected to the main network in
            any way. As a matter of fact, the Discogs Jazz network spans 1,100 separate components,
            ranging from 1 to 35,128 musicians in size. 75% of these components have a maximum of 6
            nodes. Yet, 87% of musicians are included in the largest component.
          This is corroborated by the degree distribution in Figure
              2, which also shows that the Discogs Network includes a large number of
            musicians with only a few direct connections to other musicians, while nodes with a
            higher number of connections are increasingly rare. In fact, over 75% of nodes have a
            degree smaller than the mean. The resulting distribution therefore resembles a power-law
            distribution.
          
            Degree distribution of the Jazz network. Outliers d > 200 are omitted from the
              distribution plot for better legibility.
            
          
          In fact, with a scaling exponent of α = 1.53, the network can be characterized as
            scale-free. Although the α-value is outside the 2-3 range, which is typical for
            scale-free networks, such outliers commonly occur and the degree distribution in Figure 2 is very similar to a power-law distribution for
            degrees greater than approximately 10. Consequently, we can classify the Jazz
            collaboration network as a scale-free network. Previous work did not calculate a scaling
            exponent for their networks; hence no comparison can be given in that regard.
          Another metric that is influenced by the widely compartmentalized nature of the network
            is the degree correlation, which once again differs considerably in comparison to
            existing work. At ρ = 0.26, a rather strong degree correlation is present, indicating
            that musicians tend to collaborate with other artists who have a similar degree.
            Possible reasons for this correlation effect become apparent in Figure 3, which plots ANND by degree and indicates the general trend with a
            linear regression.
          
            Average nearest neighbor degree (ANND) by node degree in the Jazz Network.
            
          
          Since the regression line is monotonously rising, the degree correlation effect can be
            validated. We can further conclude that since 75% of nodes have a degree of 26 or less,
            most of the correlation effect can be attributed to the mentioned small components
            coming from only one record or a fixed set of people, as these share the same degree
            within their component, having little outside connections.
          
            Local clustering coefficient distribution for the Jazz network.
            
          
          Regarding the overall distribution of the local clustering coefficient of the Discogs
            network in Figure 4, it can be observed that half of the
            regarded data have a local clustering coefficient of 1. Another spike occurs at 0, with
            all other values being represented in a nearly equal fashion. The two spikes at 0 and 1
            could once again be due to the high number of smaller components: if a group of
            musicians has only released one album, or does not collaborate outside their usual
            setting, all the nodes inside this component have a clustering coefficient of 1.
            Similarly, solo artists inherently have a clustering coefficient of 0.
          In conjunction with the degree distribution and correlation, some assumptions about the
            overall structure of collaboration in Jazz can be derived. The results regarding degree
            distribution and correlation allow some assumptions about the overall nature of Jazz
            collaborations in the regarded network. The new data indicates that in contrast to
            previous findings, not only one dominant component, which includes almost all of the
            network, can be found, but smaller, separate groups of artists play a significant role
            too. A large number of musicians only appear in a fixed set, forming their own network
            components, bearing no connection to the rest of the artists. However, since most nodes
            are included in the largest component, the existing interpretation of Jazz as a highly
            collaborative genre still stands, as expressed by the transitive, closely-knit network
            structure. As the network is scale-free, it exhibits only a few highly connected hubs.
            These hubs may be theorized to stand for those artists who have a huge influence on the
            overall genre.
        
        
          4.3 Hip Hop Collaboration
          Table 3 provides descriptive network statistics for the
            Discogs Hip Hop network and compares them to the data derived by Smith . Again, the networks are generated in different ways. While
            Smith's network includes only the connections between rappers/singers associated with
            single song lyrics, the Discogs data provides a much broader range of roles, such as
            musicians involved in the DJ mix, remix, and beats of an album.
          
            Comparison of descriptive statistics of different our Discogs Hip Hop network and
              the existing lyrics Hip Hop network by . n – number of nodes
              in the network, m – number of undirected edges, d̅ – average degree per node, c̅ –
              mean local clustering coefficient, C – transitivity score, ρ – degree correlation
              coefficient, α – power-law scaling exponent 
            
              
              n
              m
              d̅
              c̅
              C
              ρ
              α
            
            
              Discogs Hip Hop Network
              23099
              81700
              7.07
              0.73
              0.63
              0.45
              1.58
            
            
              Lyrics Network 
              4433
              57972
              20.95
              0.48
              0.18
              0.06
              3.5
            
          
          Here too, the Discogs network is considerably larger in size. There are about five
            times as many musicians in our network, sharing 1.4 times as many connections. Once
            again, with 7.07 the average degree is considerably lower in the Discogs data, with an
            average number of 20.95 neighbors in Smith's network. This could be partly due to the
            methods used for network inference, as already mentioned for the Jazz networks.
            Moreover, the granularity of the data could be assumed as a different reason for the Hip
            Hop genre, since the time frame and general method are similar for both Hip Hop
            datasets. Smith uses around 30,000 lyrics files to collect the network data, about 4.5
            times more releases than were included in our study. A single song, as opposed to a
            whole record, usually has fewer people involved. Therefore, the number of involved
            artists per release is much higher in the Discogs data, but the total number of releases
            used to infer the network is lower. These numbers facilitate a higher ratio of edges to
            nodes, in turn explaining the divergence in average degrees.
          In general, the chosen metrics deviate strongly from their counterparts in existing
            work. Both the average local clustering degree and the global clustering coefficient are
            much higher in the Discogs network than in Smith's analyses. Following the same line of
            reasoning as for the Jazz network, some of these observations may be attributed to the
            overall large number of components included in our network. In total, 3,076 components
            are present, ranging from 1 to 11,285 in size. Half the network is included in the
            largest component, while 75% of components consist of four nodes or less. Figure 5 shows the degree distribution for the Hip Hop
            network, with the majority of nodes showing a rather low degree, quickly decaying for
            fewer nodes with higher degrees. More concretely, the distribution indicates that three
            out of four artists have only collaborated with eight people or less.
          
            Degree distribution of the Hip Hop network. Outliers d > 40 from are omitted
              from distribution plot for better legibility.
            
          
          As already seen in the Jazz network, the scaling exponent here again α is outside the
            usual range. In previous work, values of α are reported . This
            difference in our data can mostly be attributed to the network creation approach: as the
            Discogs network presumably is more sparse with regard to connections (as indicated by
            the lower average degree), the decay of the power-law function is also smaller.
            Ultimately, both values lead to the same conclusion, which is to classify the
            collaboration structure of Hip Hop as being scale-free. The high number of disconnected
            components in the network, in conjunction with the diameter of these local sub-networks
            being small, gives a possible explanation for the high degree correlation of ρ =
            0.45.
          Figure 6 shows the ANND plotted by node degree,
            supporting the notion of a high correlation between degrees. The overall trend, as
            indicated by the linear regression line, is rising, with the effect being most
            pronounced in lower degrees. This implies that artists with a low degree tend to work
            together with other artists of low degree, while this trend is much more diverse in
            higher degrees, where no clear pattern is apparent.
          
            Average nearest neighbor degree (ANND) by node degree in the Hip Hop
              Network.
            
          
          With regard to the clustering properties of the network, we can observe a systematic
            difference in previous findings. Both the average local clustering coefficient and the
            global clustering coefficient are much higher in the Discogs network than in Smith's
            analyses.
          
            Local clustering coefficient distribution for the Hip Hop network.
            
          
          The two spikes at 0 and 1 in the distribution of the local clustering coefficient shown
            in Figure 7 can be attributed to the high number of small
            components and some solo artists that are being included. The values in between are
            somewhat evenly distributed throughout the whole range, with the upper range being
            slightly more represented.
          Regarding the overall structure of collaboration in Hip Hop, our data indicates that
            solo artists, as well as small and consistent groups of artists, play a bigger role than
            previously assumed since a significant number of musicians only appears in a fixed set
            with no connection to the rest of the artists. Still, a large portion of the community
            shares highly collaborative properties, forming many connections between different
            subnetworks. Hubs are, therefore, highly relevant when it comes to brokering between
            more tightly knit local groupings. This observation is characteristic of scale-free
            networks, which can be assumed for the case of Hip Hop collaboration.
        
        
          4.4 Comparison of Genres
          Jazz is typically characterized as a highly dynamic and versatile genre. Especially the
            Jazz community of the 1940s and 1950s is shaped by constant upheavals and change, not
            only concerning the musical style itself but above all, the constellations of musicians
            in this time seemed to be in constant flux. Unlike in current Pop or Rock bands, it is
            rather atypical in Jazz to play in the same constellation of musicians for a longer
            period of time. Instead, many musicians belong to several formations simultaneously . This tendency is well reflected in the
            collaboration networks. In comparison to the Discogs Hip Hop network, the average Jazz
            musician has more than four times more connections than a Hip Hop artist. The data shows
            that collaborations in Jazz are more frequent and involve more people than collaboration
            in Hip Hop. The Hip Hop community is more compartmentalized than the Jazz community,
            with only 50% of the artists being included in the main component, and 75% in Jazz,
            respectively.
          After all, we can observe that Jazz musicians in the course of their career tend to
            collaborate with more different musicians than hip hop artists do. A similar picture
            emerges with regard to the clustering coefficient: While the Discogs Hip Hop network
            exhibits a total global clustering coefficient of 0.63, the Jazz network is only half as
            transitive. Thus, while the Jazz network as a whole seems to be highly connected, in Hip
            Hop, we see a tendency towards the development of smaller, though very closely connected
            groups. The degree correlation also shows that there seems to be a higher tendency of
            two actors with similar degrees to work together on a project in the Hip Hop network,
            which appears to be less the case in Jazz.
          In Figures 8-11, we show partial visualizations of both the Jazz and the Hip Hop
            networks. A complete visualization of the two networks is not possible due to their
            size. Instead, we opted to show the neighborhood of important hubs in each network. For
            Hip Hop, we chose Tupac Shakur (2Pac) and Biggie Smalls
            (Notorious B.I.G.), two of the most influential Hip Hop artists of all
            time. For Jazz, we show the neighborhood of Louis Armstrong and Ella
              Fitzgerald. The visualizations illustrate the differences described before: a
            musician in Jazz is connected with many more other artists than is the case in Hip Hop,
            Jazz is less transitive, and the other nodes a hub connects to vary more in degree.
            Also, in Jazz, most nodes are in one large interconnected component, with smaller groups
            in the periphery, while in Hip Hop, we find smaller, tightly knit clusters.
          
            Neighborhood of Tupac Shakur in the Hip-Hop network. Nodes are scaled by
              degree.
            
          
          
            Neighborhood of Notorious B.I.G. in the Hip-Hop network. Nodes are scaled by
              degree.
            
          
          
            Neighborhood of Louis Armstrong in the Jazz network. Nodes are scaled by
              degree.
            
          
          
            Neighborhood of Ella Fitzgerald in the Jazz network. Nodes are scaled by
              degree.
            
          
        
      

        5. Conclusion
        The study of collaboration patterns in music is a lively branch of musicological,
          sociological, and historical research. However, most existing research is based on very
          heterogeneous data collections, making it hard to compare different results to each other.
          Furthermore, the lack of a common collection of data and of a shared definition of
          collaboration makes it almost impossible to compare different genres. Accordingly,
          existing research on music collaboration is mainly focused on singular genre analyses,
          with Jazz being the most studied genre by far. To support future inter-genre comparisons,
          we propose an approach that makes use of the freely available, ever-growing metadata
          collection Discogs. We further suggest deriving collaborations between musicians by
          extracting information of shared music releases from Discogs. Whenever two musicians
          played together on a record, we treat this as an instance of collaboration. We are well
          aware that this particular view on music collaboration comes with some conceptual
          limitations, as collaboration might also take place by means of unrecorded live gigs or
          private jam sessions. Yet, this approach to modeling collaboration can be scaled-up very
          easily, allowing us to obtain networks that are much more comprehensive in size than any
          of the data sets of comparable existing studies. These networks further include a rich set
          of additional metadata, for instance the time and role of each collaborative connection.
          Furthermore, the data source does not suffer from noisy data, as unique identifiers for
          artists are used in Discogs to map different spellings and pseudonyms to the same
          node.
        To illustrate the potential of the suggested approach, we also present a case study in
          the inter-genre comparison of Jazz and Hip Hop, applying a variety of metrics commonly
          used to describe topological properties in collaborative networks. In contrast to previous
          work on music collaboration, we were able to demonstrate the influence of smaller artist
          groups and lesser known musicians. Accordingly, we were able to get some novel insights in
          this direction, as the collaboration networks seem to consist of many more components than
          previously assumed. This difference accounts for most of the divergence of metrics when
          comparing our results to those of previous music collaboration studies. The Discogs data
          suggests that the networks at hand are scale-free, (although with a very low scaling
          exponent). In other words, very few artists are very well connected to a lot of other
          artists, while most of the artists only have very few relations to other artists. The
          collaboration patterns of the two investigated genres mainly differ in group size, number
          of collaborations per artist, and overall density of the network. In Jazz, collaboration
          is more frequent, takes place with more people at a time, and with a greater variety of
          people overall than in Hip Hop in formal recordings.
        Future work could provide a more detailed insight into collaboration patterns, e.g., by
          interrelating network position (i.e., centrality) with popularity metrics from other
          sources, as shown in Smith . Another possibility would be the
          inclusion of a more in-depth analysis of the formed cliques using the Girvan-Newman method
          of betweenness centrality , as previously employed by Gleiser
          and Danon . Other future directions might point toward the
          exploration of the scale-free properties of the networks in more detail. Central questions
          here are whether the length of a music career or the overall degree is a reliable
          indicator for success. Providing an interactive exploration interface similar to Filippova
          et al.  could further enhance the usefulness of our approach
          for future research, as it allows researchers from all backgrounds to gain insight into
          the collaborative patterns. An example of such an application based on Discogs data is the
            Disco\Graph project.
        Finally, the network data itself could be enhanced in several ways, for instance, by
          adding more releases (also from lower quality levels) in order to further increase the
          network size. Metadata about sub-genres of a release would be a valuable addition for
          historical network analysis, since the evolution of those sub-genres and the musicians
          associated with them could be studied in more detail. Enhancing the networks to records
          that are listed with more than one genre would provide the grounds to facilitate research
          in inter-genre collaborations. On the whole, we hope that the approach described in this
          article will initiate many further, more detailed studies that will examine collaboration
          strategies and patterns between artists of different genres, thus adding to the emerging
          field of computational musicology as part of the digital humanities.
      
