Title:  A Digital Humanities Approach to Narrative Voice in 
Volume:  008
Issue:  2
Date:  18 July 2014
Abstract:  
            
            This paper is situated within debates surrounding modes of close and
                  distant reading
                as they are played out in both the fields of world
               literature and digital literary studies. It proposes an alternative digital
               humanities approach to the study of world literature, advocating new methods of close
               comparative reading rather than the mode of distant reading endorsed by Franco
               Moretti and Alan Liu . Specifically, the research method
               proposed here is focused on a close reading of the novel The
                  Secret Scripture (2008) by Irish author Sebastian Barry, with comparative
               reference to Pat Barker’s well-known war novel Regeneration (1997). Through the development and implementation of a
               digital humanities research method which facilitates new forms of digital literary
               analysis, we demonstrate that close reading and digital humanities can too be
                  practicing partners in a way that serves to advance work in both the fields
               of world literature and digital literary studies.
         
Full Body Text: 
A Digital Humanities Approach to Narrative Voice in The Secret
               Scripture: Proposing a New Research Method

            Introduction: World Literature, Distant Reading and the Digital Humanities
            Since the publication of Franco Moretti’s controversial essay Conjectures on World Literature
               , distant reading has become a buzzword among
               scholars in the literary studies community. Distant reading, understood in opposition
               to close reading is, according to Moretti, a method of analysis which 
                  allows you to focus on units that are
                     much smaller or much larger than the text: devices, themes, tropes – or genres
                     and systems
                  
               . In tracing patterns as they occur across large corpora of texts, Moretti’s
               methodology is increasingly dependent on quantitative research methods and data
               visualization techniques. Owing to the close affinity between Moretti’s distant
               reading and these methods, Alan Liu has recently suggested that the concept has
               brought the digital humanities into closer proximity with the traditional humanities
               discipline of literary studies: the digital
                  humanities are now what may be called the practicing partner of
                  distant reading
               . Interestingly, however, few literary scholars
               have acknowledged or addressed the digital humanities methodologies underlying
               Moretti’s concept.The work of Matt Wilkens is a notable exception to this (see
                     ).Similarly, few digital humanists consider
               distant reading within the context it was first proposed, namely, within the field of
               world literature. Subsequently we find that while members within both the literary
               and the digital humanities communities are purportedly addressing the same concept,
               they are doing so in quite different ways and from still divergent standpoints.
            This paper aims to bring together the two strands of these debates and by doing so to
               advance current understandings of the relationship between digital humanities and the
               literary practices of distant and close reading — the latter practice, we argue,
               being too quickly jettisoned within recent studies. Taking a work of contemporary
               Irish fiction,The Secret Scripture
               , as a case study, we describe the evolution and
               implementation of an innovative new research method, incorporating digital humanities
               and traditional literary methodologies which enable an enhanced form of close reading
               of the novel within a world literature framework. Situating our research within the
               debate between modes of close and distant reading, we focus on what Moretti has
               identified as the element of literary texts for which modes of distant reading are
               unable to account, i.e.local narrative voice
               . We describe the development and implementation of a
               digital humanities tool and methodology which support a close reading of this
               particular textual feature within a comparative framework. In its second iteration,
               the software is expanded to include the input of multiple literary scholars as they
               engage with the text. In concluding, we argue that the digital humanities approach
               endorsed in our case study shows that close reading and digital humanities can too be
                  practicing partners
                in a way that serves to advance work in both the
               fields of world literature and digital literary studies.
         

            Distant Reading and World Literature
            In the field of literary studies, the methodological debates regarding close and
               distant readings have become inescapably intertwined with questions as to the
               relative status of national and world literatures respectively. In Conjectures on World Literature, Moretti takes issue with
               the tendency in literary scholarship to study literature within national contexts
               only and to endorse practices of close reading which he describes as the very solemn treatment of very few texts
                  taken very seriously
               . Against such limited approaches to the diverse
               and vast field of the world’s literature, Moretti maintains that the main goal of
               distant reading and of world literature is to provide a thorn in the side, a permanent intellectual challenge to
                  national literatures
               . Distant reading, according to Moretti, allows you to focus on units that are much
                  smaller or much larger than the text: devices, themes, tropes — or genres and
                  systems
                and, in so doing, to comprehend the literary
               system as a whole rather than as it manifests in national contexts only.
            InWhat is World Literature? (2003), David Damrosch,
               another leading figure in the world literature debate, establishes the labels
                  specialist and generalist readings to distinguish between national
               and global approaches to literary scholarship respectively. The term
                  specialist refers to an approach or an individual concerned with studying
               literary works within their culture of origins and national literary tradition;
               practitioners endorsing specialist methodologies are characterized by a concern with
               close textual reading and the endorsement of modes of microcriticism. Conversely,
                  generalist refers to approaches characterized by a high level of cultural abstraction
                and a refusal to engage with the
               specificities of individual literary works or their place within a specific national
               literature. In recent years, the generalist approach has become most readily
               identified with Moretti’s mode of distant reading.
            
            However, even within Moretti’s arguments for extending analysis beyond the confines
               of national literature, the necessity for a specialist, local knowledge is
               occasionally acknowledged. In Conjunctures on World
                  Literature, he concedes that the narrator’s voice is the key variable element that disrupts a
               distant or generalist approach to literature .
               As the embodiment of local form through local narrative voice,
               the narrator is the pole of comment, of
                  explanation, of evaluation
               ; when foreign formal patterns (or actual foreign
                  presence, for that matter) make characters behave in strange ways […] then of
                  course comment becomes uneasy — garrulous, erratic, rudderless
               . Tellingly, it is at this point — that of
                  local narrative voice — that the generalist must yield to the specialist’s
               knowledge and methods of close reading in order to make sense of the erratic
               comment that the local narrator relays.
            Having called attention to both the potential value and the limitations of both
               generalist and specialist approaches, Damrosch notes that the key challenge facing
               scholars concerned with the study of world literature is the establishment of a
               methodology which enables the researcher to mediate between broad, but often reductive, overviews
                  and intensive, but often atomistic, close readings
               . The solution he proposes is that world
               literature can best be read by combining both specialist and generalist approaches:
               rather than adapting the role of either generalist or specialist in the study of
               world literature, Damrosch suggests it is more useful to endorse a both / and
               approach. He points out that when our purpose is not to delve into a culture in
               detail, the reader and even the work
                  itself may benefit from being spared the full force of our local
                  knowledge, and that the generalist will find much of the specialist’s information about the
                  work’s origins is no longer relevant and not only can be but should be set
                  aside
               . Conversely, the specialist’s knowledge
               serves as the major safeguard against the generalist’s own will to power over texts that otherwise become all
                  too easily grist for the mill of a preformed historical argument or theoretical
                  system
               . Hence Damrosch argues that systemic approaches need to be counter balanced with
                  close attention to particular languages and specific texts
                which will enable the generalist to
               understand the work effectively in its new cultural and theoretical context while at
               the same time having a fundamental comprehension of its relation to the source
               culture.
         

            Digital Humanities Methodologies and Modes of Readings
            Damrosch’s aspirations for a combined generalist/specialist methodology have a
               particular, though as yet largely unacknowledged, relevance for newly emerging
               digital humanities literary methodologies. Instead, Moretti’s terms have tended to
               dominate the field and in recent years a growing number of works in digital literary
               studies have explicitly endorsed modes of distant reading 
               . The most common strategy has been to analyze large
               corpora of texts in order to identify patterns as they occur within the wider
               literary field, and thus to move literary studies beyond the confines of literary
               canons , , . Conversely, Tanya Clement has employed text mining and
               data visualization techniques to enable a reading of an individual text, Gertrude
               Stein’s The Making of Americans, from a distance
               . In most instances, however, the formal
               features of the text or texts under examination are read at a remove from the
               cultural context in which they are either produced or read.
            In his article Where is Cultural Criticism
                  in the Digital Humanities?, Alan Liu has termed the lack of engagement
               with cultural criticism as a key deficit for digital humanities. In this
               scenario, distant reading — understood as a catch-all for long-established
                  cultural-critical methods — becomes the post-Cold War savior and the means
               to break an earlier formalist-culturalist détente: Sophisticated digital humanities methods that require explicit
                  programmatic instructions and metadata schema now take the ground of elemental
                  practice previously occupied by equally sophisticated but tacit close reading
                  methods
               . For Liu, the contrast in new practice is so
                  stark as to change the very nature
                  of the ground being fought over: the text as block quotations serving as a middle ground for fluid movement
                  between close and distant reading are disappearing from view, and are
               increasingly replaced as objects of
                  sustained focus by data
                  visualizations of large patterns
               . While Liu’s arguments concerning cultural
               criticism have a compelling and mobilizing force, his jettisoning of close reading
               and of block quotations as subjects of enquiry for digital humanities is, in our
               view, premature. Nor, as this paper will show, need a partnership of close reading
               and digital humanities, informed by recent developments in world literature, operate
               in isolation from cultural-critical methods.
         

            Case Study: Local Narrative Voice in The Secret
                  Scripture
            
            The subject of this case study, Sebastian Barry’s 2008 novel The
                  Secret Scripture, is set in present-day Ireland and tells the story of the
               100-year old Roseanne Clear who was incarcerated in the Sligo Mental Asylum at some
               point during the mid-twentieth century. The story is relayed through a double
               narrative: the personal recollections of Roseanne relayed in her Testimony of Herself and the observations made by her psychiatrist, Dr.
               Grene, in his own investigation into Roseanne’s admittance into the hospital, which
               are recorded in his Commonplace Book. Although the novel
               shifts between the first-person narratives of Roseanne and that of Dr. Grene,
               Roseanne’s voice is the more prominent of the two throughout the novel.
            WhileThe Secret Scripturehas enjoyed a very positive
               reception and a number of literary awards, some divergence exists among critics in
               their evaluation of the efficacy of the narrative voice. For many critics and
               readers, Roseanne’s voice is what renders the story being recounted so powerful.
               Writing for The Daily Telegraph, David Robson goes so
               far as to argue that in Roseanne Clear, Barry has created one of the most memorable narrators in recent
                  fiction
               . Robson’s claim was echoed by Matthew Parris, chair of
               the 2008 Costa Book Award judging panel, who argues that in Roseanne, Sebastian Barry has created one of the great
                  narrative voices in contemporary fiction (Parris quoted in The Daily Telegraph, 2 May 2008). However, curiously, and as
               recorded by the IndependentArts Correspondent on 28
               January 2009, the judges awarded the prize to Barry in spite of their explicit
               acknowledgement that the book was flawed
                  in many ways. The strongest criticism was generated by the novel’s ending
               while another critique centred on the voice of Dr. Grene. For Parris, it was the narrative strength of the central
                  character, Roseanne, which helped Barry triumph…. In Roseanne, a narrator had been
                  created that is so transcendent that it redeems all of the structural weaknesses
                  of the book (Independent, 28 January
               2009).
            However, Barry’s use of Roseanne as first-person narrator has also generated strong
               critical scepticism regarding the credibility of her voice. Writer Adam Roberts takes
               issue with the plausibility of the prose allocated to Roseanne, arguing that I’ve only known one 100-year old, and she hardly spoke at
                  all. Most centurions, I’d wager, limit themselves to pardon? and the nurses are stealing my clothes, and few
                  if any are capable of eloquence like this: There
                     was a black river that flowed through the town, and if it had no grace for the
                     mortal beings, it did for swans and many swans resorted there, and even rode
                     the river like some kind of plunging animals, in floods. (The Valve, 29 September 2008)
               
            
            In The New Statesman, Robert Hanks also questions the
               success of the narrative voice on account of Barry’s failure to give his two narrators sufficiently
                  distinct voices
               . According to Hanks, Dr Grene was educated in England, and
               at one point says that nobody could mistake him for an Irishman, whereas he is at
               times almost stage Irish. The book is also marred by a self-consciously literary
               quality, manifested in Roseanne’s improbable attachment to Sir Thomas Browne’s
               Religio Medici and the predictable unreliability of the narrators .
            A second and related significant thread within critical reception of the novel is its
               status as national narrative. While Roseanne’s narrative relays a subjective
               account of her own personal history, numerous critics have noted the conflation
               between personal history and Irish history that occurs in The
                  Secret Scripture. Anna Leach calls attention to the fact that as the country of Ireland, or Éire, is often
                  represented as a woman, it is not difficult to see parallels between the plight of
                  Roseanne, beautiful and abused, and the plight of the country
               . Writing for The New York
                  Times, Art Winslow notes that in The Secret
                  Scripture, personal fate and
                  national fate are incestuously bound (16 January 2009). And according to
               the publishing blurb circulated by publisher Faber and Faber, Roseanne’s story becomes an alternative, secret, history of
                  Ireland (faberandfaber.co.uk, 2008).
            The extent, however, to which Barry has been successful in combining personal history
               with national history has also produced disagreement among critics and readers. For
               Leach, Roseanne’s story is at times rendered more symbolic than human, which she sees as ultimately weakening
               the credibility of Barry’s plot . Similarly, Deborah
               Cameron, writing for ABC Sydney, also questions the degree to which Barry
               successfully portrays both a personal and a national narrative through Roseanne’s
               first-person narrative: she asks whether Roseanne live[s] and breathe[s] as an independent character
               or if she is a puppet, jerked around to
                  illustrate various events from Ireland’s past
               . Underlying this particular issue is a suggestive and
               significant debate regarding the novel’s attempt to convey both a personal and
               national trauma, not only as a historical event but one of acute relevance to
               contemporary Ireland.
         

            Introduction to Digital Humanities Research Method
            The case study constructed by this paper is thus shaped by the analytic crossover of
               current debates in digital humanities and world literature regarding modes of reading
               (close and distant) and interpretative approaches (general and specialist). Owing to
               the debates surrounding narrative technique in The Secret
                  Scripture and its status as a national novel, it provides an interesting
               case study for examining how the formal feature of narrative voice employed by
               the author affects the content of the novel and its reception. This literary enquiry
               informs our specialist approach and the construction of a related digital humanities
               methodology.
            In order to move our analysis of The Secret
               Scripturebeyond an Irish context and tradition, following Damrosch, we employ
               a comparative approach . As Damrosch notes,
                  to be effective, a comparison of
                  disparate works needs to be grounded in some third term or set of concerns that
                  can provide a common basis for analysis
               . Specifically, we include a comparison of
               Barry’s work to Pat Barker’s well-known novel, Regeneration (1995) as a narrative also structured around the dialogical
               relationship of patient and therapist. Set in Britain in the early twentieth century,
                  Regeneration is based on the real-life experiences of
               British army officers being treated for shell shock during World War I at
               Craiglockhart War Hospital in Edinburgh. Its narrative relays the treatment of
               soldiers suffering mental breakdown and is shaped predominantly around the
               discussions which the psychiatrist Dr. Rivers has with a number of patients within
               the asylum in which he works, most notably those with the war poet, Siegfried
               Sassoon. In narratological terms, Barker’s novel utilizes the narrative technique of
                  free-indirect discourse, which shifts between various characters’
               perspectives throughout and which facilitates an especially complex and layered
               narrative. Thus, like The Secret Scripture, Regeneration provides an account of an individual trauma
               which is also intimately related to a wider historical trauma inherent within its
               culture of origins, and whose successful narrative realisation depends on a subtle
               use of voice and focalized discourse. Our comparative approach is therefore
               deliberately situated in and constructed through the specificities of texts — in
               thematic content and in narrative form — from which contrasts and similarities
               emerge. In this case study, the two novels under discussion each offer a fictional
               depiction of personal and cultural trauma, conveyed through extended narrative
               dialogue, and a key objective is to advance readers’ understanding of the complex
               interoperation of form and theme in these novels.
            As an interdisciplinary humanities and computer science team, we conducted a case
               study that initially sought to develop a digital humanities tool and methodology that
               enabled a) a close reading of The Secret Scripture’s
               narrative voice and b) reading the text through a comparative analysis with
               Pat Barker’s Regeneration (1995), again through a focus
               on narrative voice. In the second stage of the case study, as detailed below, we
               sought to compare specialist readings of one text — the Irish novel The Secret Scripture — in order to provide the literary
               analyst with additional insight into the work when read within its culture of origins
               by diverse readers.
            Our aim was to develop and implement a digital humanities research method, based on
               close textual reading of blocks of selected text. Specifically, we chose to pay
               particular attention to the interrelation of narrative voice and narrative theme,
               and, within the area of theme, to references to trauma and to cultural context with a
               view to elucidating not only the text’s generalist and specialist
               dimensions but, crucially, also their interrelationship. As will be discussed in more
               detail below, we developed a visualization of the markup of the narrative structure
               of both The Secret Scriptureand Regenerationto enable the literary analyst in the first instance to (a)
               identify the degree to which the various characters dominate the dialogue; (b)
               identify the degree to which the omniscient narrator is utilized in the passages of
               dialogue between patient and therapist; and (c) identify the degree to which the
               narrative is autodiegetic. Secondly, the visualization allows the markup of instances
               of theme, thus significantly extending the existing possibilities of literary
               annotation and comparative analysis, as will be examined in the next section.
         

            Digital Humanities Methodologies and Tool Design
            Once the literary research question was established, the software tools were designed
               to support the scholar/analyst in its investigation. The research aimed to
               investigate the following three elements: 1) narrative structure, 2) trauma and 3)
               cultural context, by firstly identifying these characteristics within the text, and
               then examining their relationship to one another. Investigation of the relationships
               was undertaken with the aid of a visualization tool, designed to render XML-encoded
               data, and support the practices in comparative analysis.
            Initially, an analysis of researcher activities led to four primary use cases
               providing key design requirements and constraints for the visualization tool, i.e. it
               should be web-based to support sharing and collaborative viewing or working; it
               should support simultaneous rendering of XML-encoded narrative for two texts (for
               example, two encodings of the same text or two encodings of different texts); it
               should render annotations associated with encoded elements; and it should provide a
               means for visual overlapping functionality to support inspection of encoding
               differences and similarities, for example, overlapping encoded segments of cultural
               and trauma indicators within a single text. The associated XML schema was also
               derived from these use cases.
            Both novels were to be examined for their narrative structure: thus the first phase
               of encoding utilised a single schema designed for marking the type of narrator being
               used, e.g. an omniscient narrator, or the deployment of one of the characters as
               narrator. The narrative techniques employed in both texts are intricate and complex.
               For example, inThe Secret Scripture, the auto-diegetic
               nature of the narrative required a means of distinguishing between when the narrator
               was narrating or speaking to another character. In Regenerationan omniscient narrator sporadically appears, with extensive
               focalizing through a character’s viewpoint. Responding to these challenges, in a
               reflexive and iterative process, we developed the encoding scheme to include an
               activity attribute, which was introduced to record whether the narrator was
                  doing (i.e. moving, looking away and so forth), speaking,
               thinking, or narrating. In addition, a focalizing activity was
               further introduced to enable the analyst to indicate when free-indirect discourse was
               being employed in Barker’s novel. This was deemed a necessary development as,
               although the omniscient narrator is employed frequently throughout the text, it is
               most often focalized through the perspective of Dr. Rivers. Hence in order to
               determine the degree to which a particular character serves as the pole of
                  comment within the novel, it was necessary to establish a means of indicating
               where the narrative is relayed through their perspective. An example of the encoding
               for narrative structure can be seen in Figure 1, which shows an excerpt from Regenerationwhere Sassoon is discussing hallucinations with
               his therapist.
            
               

            
            The second phase of encoding involved marking characteristics of trauma and
                  cultural context within the text. One of the aims of the research was to
               investigate the textual relationship between these two characteristics; as such they
               wereindependently marked into the text that had already been marked for narrative
               structure (as above). This process produced two encodings for each novel. One
               encoding made explicit the text associated with trauma (see Figure 2), the other
               encoding made explicit the text associated with cultural context (see Figure 3). The
               relationship between the two themes could then be compared and contrasted either
               within a single novel, or each theme could be examined across the two novels. This
               was achieved by rendering these encodings within the software environment.
            
               
            
            
               
            
            The aforementioned developments are examples of the enhanced attention to the
               literary conventions and functions of narrative structure demanded by the encoding
               process. As the act of encoding demanded that the analyst identify and name the
               various narrative techniques employed in the two novels under examination, through
               this digital humanities process, she was brought into a deeper engagement with the
               formal features of the texts, thus bringing her to an increased awareness of how the
               perspectives generated by both novels were constructed and the complexity of their
               structure.
            The process of encoding further served to enhance the analyst’s engagement with the
               manner in which cultural context is made manifest throughout the two novels. In
               marking the indicators of cultural context, it was discovered that there were various
               types thereof within the passages. For example, within both novels there are direct
               references to specific place names, such as Lough Gill in The
                  Secret Scriptureand Craiglockhart in Regeneration. However, there are also less explicit indicators such as
               the use of colloquialisms within the dialogue. Similarly, when marking up indicators
               of trauma it emerged that the trauma tag was also being applied to both overt and
               covert indicators of trauma. For example, in The Secret
                  Scripture, Dr. Grene explicitly refers to traumatic events in Roseanne’s
               life, such as her incarceration. Such
            indicators are notably different in kind to the silence that the patient displays
               in
            response to Dr. Grene’s suggestion of releasing Roseanne back into society .
            As these two types of indicators of cultural context and trauma are not one and the
               same, it became necessary to distinguish between the various types. Subsequently,
                  implicit and explicit descriptors were included, and implemented as
               attributes on the relevant tags in order to allow the encoder to specify the
               differences between the various types of indicators. Again the process of encoding
               and the degree of specificity that was permitted by the development of appropriate
               XML tags brought the analyst into a deeper engagement with how cultural context and
               trauma are interlinked throughout bothThe Secret
                  Scriptureand Regeneration (to be discussed in
               detail under Critical Analysis).
            The schema design was undertaken using an iterative design process where a basic
               design is enhanced over time through engagement with the source and the project
               collaborators. This well-established approach to data modelling takes cognisance of
               the hermeneutic spiral created as soon as a source is examined through a certain lens
               (in this case, for markers of trauma and cultural context), and seeks to account for
               the expected requirement drift associated with this growing understanding. For
               instance, through this iterative process, differences emerged as to what the various
               researchers considered to be indicators of cultural context and trauma and whether
               they were explicit or implicit. The discussions and debates that ensued brought to
               light the subjective nature of this interpretative process; thus we considered it
               useful and necessary to capture the reasoning behind each markup decision. Hence, a
                  comment attribute was added to the cultural context and trauma tags to
               record such content. This form of annotation seemed more appropriate for this
               research, rather than adopting, or developing a complete annotation system.
               Furthermore, this approach aligned well with the researcher’s modus operandi of
               simultaneously identifying some indicator and giving a reason, rather than annotating
               some textual element afterwards which is a different use case.
            Visualisation of the encodings was achieved using a custom-designed and developed
               software tool.  The design was driven using standard web-development software
               engineering techniques and paradigms, for example, use case analysis, iterative
               design and design patterns. In order to enhance the comparative analysis of the
               various encodings both within and across texts, we determined that the interface
               should be divided to contain two scroll panes. This approach would provide the
               researcher with a method to quickly navigate pairs of XML-encoded  documents. Each
               pane was given an associated dropbox providing the user with a list of available, and
               uniquely identifiable, encodings. The user can select which novels and which
               encodings (trauma or cultural context) he/she wishes to compare (Figure 4). The
               choice of novels and encodings is determined by whether the user wishes to compare
               the encodings as they appear within an individual text or to conduct a comparative
               analysis of either cultural context or trauma as they appear in both novels.
            The technologies used were XHTML, XML, XSLT and JavaScript, and Perl; all deployed in
               a client-server architecture.  The panels were realised in XHTML.  Many of the
               interactive elements of the tool were realised using JavaScript.  The panels used
               updatable <div> elements that had accompanying JavaScript functions for
               repositioning, changing the z-index (overlapping order), and adjusting the
               transparency of the text background. Both the text and the visual-aid colours and
               symbols within the panels were generated from the XML encodings using XSLT.  When the
               panels are overlapped in the centre of the page, the backgrounds become transparent
               in order to view overlapping color-coded markup segments. Transparency management was
               achieved by manipulating the the z-index of the panels, and the transparency of the
               panel <div> elements. Both panels also implement co-operative JavaScript
               scrolling event handlers which, if selected, automatically scroll the other panel if
               the user is examining the same text (but different encodings) in both panels. The
               tooltip feature was also custom developed using Javascript.
            
               
            
            Colored speech bubbles were deployed to designate the various narrator participants:
               green for the therapists’ speech, orange for the patients’ and red for that of the
               omniscient narrator. When the narrator participants are engaged in dialogue, two
               overlapping speech bubbles denote this, with the speech bubble of the character that
               is speaking being the larger of the two. While a user engaging with the softwarecan
               shift between encodings of cultural context and trauma, the visualisation of the
               narrative structure in both novels remains permanent (see Figure 5).
            
               
            
            The segments of text that have been marked up as indicators of cultural context and
               trauma appear as highlighted text. The sections of text marked as cultural context
               are highlighted in yellow, and those of trauma in light purple. These colors were
               chosen since: a) they are easy on the eye; b) they allow the highlighted text to be
               easily read, and: c) when the two are overlapped, one color does not dominate over
               the other (see Figure 6.).
            
               
            
            Using the scroll function, the user can a) compare and contrast the degree to which
               cultural context and trauma appear within the one text; or b) compare the extent to
               which markers of cultural context or trauma appear in The Secret
                  Scriptureor Regeneration. The simultaneous
               scroll function enables the user to examine the respective encodings on a
               line-by-line basis. The overlap function was designed in order to permit the literary
               analyst to see where the various forms of encoding overlap. For example, by setting
               both scroll panes to The Secret Scripture, the user can
               utilize the overlap function to see which segments of texts have been marked as both
               indicators of cultural context and as trauma (Figure 7). This permits a comparative
               analysis of two thematic readings of an individual text not possible in codex
               form.
            
               
            
            The comments inserted by the encoder during the mark up process are visualized in a
               comment box, headed with the name of the user who carried out the encoding (similar
               to the insert comment function available in modern document processing applications).
               This box appears when the user places the cursor over any of the highlighted text in
               any of the encodings of trauma or cultural context in either The
                  Secret Scripture or Regeneration (figure 8.). If required, the comments can be utilised in
                  sticky manner and remain in view throughout analysis.
            
               
            
         

            Evolution of Research Project
            The software was first presented at the Digital Humanities Conference 2010 . At this point, we had determined that a useful further
               development of the software would be to enable the input of multiple markers. Our
               future design goal was corroborated by feedback received at the Digital Humanities
               Conference, where attendees expressed interest in the possibility of having multiple
               scholars comment on a text or texts. In order to accommodate this evolved research
               concern, and shortly after its initial dissemination, the software was developed
               further to include the input of multiple scholars engaging with The Secret Scripture. Expanding the commenting functionality, we deployed
               contributions by nine literary scholars of various nationalities who were asked to
               mark up the same segment of text from The Secret
                  Scriptureand to specify the reasoning behind their choice of markup.
               Having collected this data from the various participants, the analyst sought to
               utilize the software to investigate the degree to which variation or conformity
               occurred among scholars considered to be specialists in the field of Irish literary
               studies as they engaged with the text under examination.
            The selected participants for this exercise were chosen from the confirmed list of
               attendees who would be present at the IASIL(The International Association for the
               Study of Irish Literatures) Conference held in Maynooth in July 2010. In selecting
               participants from the IASIL attendee list, we consciously limited our sample to
               specialists in the field of Irish studies as this would ensure an average familiarity
               with the cultural context in which the text is situated across the respondents.
               However, while all the participants were specialists in the area of Irish literature,
               they were of differing nationalities.The nationalities of the participants were
                  as follows: Participants 1-4 were of Irish origins; Participants 5, 6 and 10 were
                  from the United States; Participant 7 was from the Czech Republic; Participant 8
                  was Spanish and; Participant 9 was Canadian-Irish. Due to work commitments,
                  Participant 10 could not partake in the exercise, thus leaving the ratio of
                  national and international participants at 4:5. Within this small sample of
               nine participants, we were interested in establishing how this specialist expertise
               differed within the interpretative community and how this could be represented by our
                  project. Each of the participants was sent three passages of dialogue
                  between the patient and therapist in The Secret
                     Scripturein two different files; one entitled Secret_Scripture_Trauma,
                  the other Secret_Scripture_Cultural_Context. As The Secret
                     Scripture was within copyright, it was not freely available in digital
                  form. Hence, the analyst had to transcribe the selected passages from the novel
                  into a Word file before any computation could be performed. In total, there were
                  seven passages which contained the desired information which equated to 9,968
                  words when typed.
            
            As the participants had limited, if any, experience in XML encoding, they were asked
               to conduct the exercise using Microsoft Word’s highlighting and insert comment
               features: had we requested that they carry out the exercise in XML, it is unlikely
               that any of the contributors would have agreed to partake, due to lack of familiarity
               with the encoding language and the time it would take in order to develop a working
               knowledge thereof. In the appropriate Word files, the participants were asked to
               highlight what they considered to be indicators of trauma by setting the highlighter
               to pink, and to yellow for those of cultural context. They were further asked to
               utilize the insert comment function on Microsoft Word to specify whether they thought
               the indicator of trauma or cultural context to be implicit and to provide a brief
               commentary on their reasoning behind their choice of markup (Figure 9).
            
               
            
            The completed exercises were examined and then used to XML-encode the plain text in
               separate XML files, with each participant having provided both a trauma and a
               cultural context file, thereby allowing the encoded narrative to be visualised using
               the software tool. As with the encodings of the initial marker, the encodings of the
               nine participants were realized using yellow to indicate markup of cultural
               contextand pink for that of trauma. No further changes to the visualization software
               were required other than changing the detail in the dropbox options to reflect the
                  Author associated with a particular encoding.
            The software and schema development cycle was typical of a digital humanities project
               in that sometimes the software provided insight into what might be possible (i.e. new
               use cases) and at other times, new emerging use cases (e.g. following discourse at
               conferences) prompted changing features in the software. There were also some
               interesting challenges associated with the actual development, for example, most
               browsers were unable to dynamically apply XSLT to an XML encoding, and then apply CSS
               to the resultant XHTML, within a <div> element. This meant that a two-step
               process was developed, whereby the XSL stylesheets were applied to the encodings and
               then saved as XHTML in order to support dynamically changing the encoding of interest
               in one of the panels. There are other reasonable, and more elegant solutions, of
               course, and could be easily implemented should a collaborative, larger-scale
               deployment be required.
         

            Critical Evaluation
            While the original version of the software was developed in order to enhance the
               comparison of thematic approaches to The Secret
                  Scripture, the software as presented at IASIL was concerned with enabling
               the comparison of various responses by literary scholars to an individual literary
               work. As the software was presented in two forms, it is necessary to discuss what it
               enabled in its initial state before proceeding to outline its capabilities when it
               was expanded to include the contributions of ten literary scholars.
            
               Version 1
               
                  The visualization of the markup of the narrative structure enables
                  the analyst to: 
                        a. identify the degree to which the various characters dominate the
                           dialogue.
                        b. identify the degree to which the omniscient narrator is utilized in
                           the passages of dialogue between patient and therapist.
                        c. identify the degree to which the narrative is autodiegetic.
                     
                  
                  As the cultural context and trauma encodings are embedded within that of the
                     narrative structure, the software enables the analyst to identify within whose
                     narrative voice and how frequently the indicators of cultural context and
                     trauma appear.
                  The overlap function enables the analyst to identify the segments of text
                     where indicators of cultural context and trauma co-occur within either of the
                     novels.
                  By setting the panes to either trauma or cultural context, the analyst can
                     visually compare the degree to which they appear in either of the
                     novels.
                  The visualization of the markup also permits the analyst to identify the
                     elements of the text that were not marked as significant indicators of either
                     cultural context or trauma.
               
            
            
               Version 2
               
                  This version enables the analyst to examine the response of an individual
                     participant to the novel by setting the scroll panes to their encodings of
                     trauma and cultural context.
                        The analyst may then:
                        a) compare either the cultural context or trauma encodings of various
                           participants.
                        b) overlap the various encodings of the participants in order to
                           identify where their respective markup overlaps.
                     
                  
                  The visualization of the commentary by the various encoders provides the
                     analyst with additional information upon which to compare choice of markup
                     along with the rationale provided by each participant.
               
            
         

            Findings
            In this study, the analyst was primarily interested in the implications of
                  narrative voice; as noted earlier, in the case ofThe
                  Secret Scripture this was a contested aspect in evaluations of the novel
               and, more generally, an important fault-line for distant and close readings of texts.
               While some analysis of the respective narrative structures would be possible without
               the software, the visualization thereof enabled the user to compare more readily the
               various narrative techniques and, in this case study, some illuminating and dynamic
               textual features emerged.
            The visualization of the narrative structure in both texts revealed that although the
               passages selected from the two novels were chosen on the basis that they contained
               dialogue between the patient and therapist, the amount of information that is relayed
               in conversation between the patient and therapist is notably less inThe Secret Scripturethan in Regeneration. This was somewhat surprising as unlike Regeneration, an omniscient narrator does not feature in The Secret Scripture. However, the visualization of the
               encoding of the narrative structure also highlights the degree to which The Secret Scriptureis autodiegetic, whereby Roseanne, the
               novel’s protagonist, narrates the story in which she herself is a character.
            The autodiegetic nature of the narrative is significant in that Roseanne, while
               refusing to dispense much information to Dr. Grene, provides the reader with the
               details of her story. Hence, the reader becomes the narrator’s confidant. This
               intimate relationship between narrator and reader created through the use of a
               specific narrative technique calls attention to the powerful function of a local
               narrative voice within the novel. By visualizing the encodings of cultural context
               and trauma within those of the novels’ narrative structures, the software further
               enabled the analyst to examine visually how the formal features of narrative, or the
                  style, interact with the narratological discourse, that is, with the
               precise details of the story being told (see ).
            Interestingly, in Version 1 of the software, the segments of texts marked up as
               indicative of trauma inThe Secret Scriptureappear most
               frequently either in Dr. Grene’s dialogue or within Roseanne’s narration, not, as one
               might expect, in her response to the therapist who questions her on the very matter.
               The interaction of form and content thus revealed emphasizes Roseanne’s unwillingness
               to voice her trauma. As Roseanne’s trauma was due in part to a patriarchal, Irish
               society denying her a voice with which to assert herself or her rights, the narrative
               structure directly supports the thematic content of the novel. More generally, it
               reflects the physical and social silencing of women in Ireland in the early to mid
               twentieth century and the difficulties in accessing their stories. Here, then, the
               status of Barry’s novel as national narrative is directly related to, and dependent
               upon, the power of the personal narrative. Our digital method makes visible not only
               this intricate relationship but further illuminates the subtle effect of Barry’s
               technique; contrary to the views of some critics that his style is
               overwritten, it is at crucial times underwritten — operating through
               telling gaps and silences as well as through what is directly expressed.
            Conversely, in Regeneration, trauma indicators are
               distributed more evenly across the discourse between the patient and the therapist
               and the omniscient narration. However, on closer inspection, one notices that when
               omniscient narration is employed, it is focalized predominantly through the character
               of Dr. Rivers due to the author’s use of free-indirect discourse. Thus, the
               indicators of trauma in Regeneration are presented more
               frequently through the therapist’s perspective. Once again, a key aspect of Barker’s
               style, and one which has strong thematic significance, is made visible and explicable
               by our method. It is worth noting in this regard that Barker’s use of narrative
               structure in turn exemplifies the approach to psychotherapy actually employed by the
               historical Dr. Rivers. As Robert Hemmings has noted: Rivers developed a therapeutic treatment based upon the
                  principle of catharsis whereby the patient was encouraged to eschew repressive
                  tendencies and give voice to the traumatic memories […] without dwelling
                  excessively upon them. Patient and physician would work together to construct from
                  these painful memories a narrative that found some tolerable, or redeeming, even
                  pleasant association for the trauma. 
               
            
            Utilizing the visualization aspect more extensively, the analyst overlapped the
               encodings for both novels in order to compare to what extent the traumas depicted in
                  Regenerationand The Secret
                  Scripturewere culturally specific. As both novels are related to events
               that have caused a cultural trauma to the respective nations in which they are
               set, the analyst expected to discover a significant degree of overlap between the
               encodings of trauma and cultural context. However, it emerged that the degree of
               overlap was relatively small. The lack thereof inspired the analyst to re-examine the
               segments of text marked as cultural context; this was an act of critical
               self-reflexivity that was made possible by the fact that her encodings had been
               captured and visualized by the software.
            Of the two novels, the overlap occurred most frequently in Regeneration. On closer inspection, the analyst discovered that her
               criteria for marking cultural context were based predominantly on explicit
               indicators, such as place names, historical personage and colloquialisms, more
               readily identifiable when one reads a novel set in a location less immediately
               familiar to the reader. As Regeneration is a more
               overtly historical novel than The Secret Scripture, it
               utilizes factual information more frequently, which could also account for the fact
               that the analyst marked more indicators of cultural context in Barker’s novel than in
               the Irish text. However, on returning to her markup of The
                  Secret Scripture, the analyst noticed that she had failed to encode a
               number of significant elements of the text that were related to cultural context due
               to her limited definition of indicators of cultural context. More so than Barker,
               Sebastian Barry employs a prose style which is full of gleaming images (Gatti,
                  The Times 1 May 2008) and it is through his creative
               use of images that he ties his novel more implicitly to an Irish cultural context.
               For example, Roseanne’s references to salmon evoke an image that is intimately
               bound not only to the Irish environment, but also to Irish mythology owing to its
               associations with stories relating to the Irish Fianna and specifically the legend of
               the bradán feasaor salmon of knowledge. Contrary to the critique cited
               earlier (that Barry’s novel elevates the symbolic over the human), symbolic
               references are used to suggest layers of psychological insight and, relatedly,
               psychological damage.
            An examination of the encoded responses of more than one analyst is a much more
               challenging comparative task. In the case of the various participants in The Secret Scripture case study (Version 2), the analyst
               found that a significant consensus occurred across the participants in relation to
               their selection of moments in the text for markup, and especially so in relation to
               cultural context. This relative conformity may be partially attributed to the
               criteria set for the exercise. It may also be due in part to the fact that the
               contributors were all specialists in the field of Irish studies. While the revelation
               of consensus was in itself a research benefit, as it provided evidence as to the
               manner in which literary scholars engage with a text, the general conformity also
               served to make the differences, and their accompanying rationale, all the more
               notable.
            In the first paragraph of the novel, only two of the six Irish contributors marked
               any of the text as being indicative of cultural context, while all four of the
               international participants annotated either specific words or phrases. The majority
               of those who did mark some text in this paragraph marked words such as green
                  fields, and folded farms, though their reasoning for doing so varied
                  (rural imagery,
               reference to either Flanders or Ireland, Ireland or Irish
                  related-images, etc). One participant noted that the reference to green
                  fields recalled W. B. Yeats’s account of four
                  green fields in his play Cathleen Ni Houlihan.
               In contrast, only one participant selected the phrase Dear reader! Dear reader, marking this segment of text as an
                  implicit marker of cultural context, which recalls the gothic of Poe or even Baudelaire.
            
            A notable feature of the annotated markup was its frequent substantiation, and
               justification, in relation to Irish history and culture. For example, one Irish
               scholar marked the transmigration of the soul as an implicit indicator of
               cultural context, commenting that: Much is made of
                  this idea in Ulysses: could possibly be an allusion
                  to it. But equally possibly not. Certainly this passage has modernist echoes — the
                  classical and the mundane.
            
            As previously mentioned, another participant situated the text within an Irish
               literary and cultural tradition by tracing a connection between Sebastian Barry’s
               novel and W. B. Yeats’s play, Cathleen Ni Houlihan. The
               impulse to locate the novel within a specific national genealogy — and the related
               hesitation — is especially telling since it strikingly re-enacts at the
                  micro-level of individual readings a central tension within the reception
               of Barry’s work – between those who seek to absorb his writings within a nationalist
               historiographical tradition, reinforcing the status of a national literature, and
               those who view his work as presenting a direct challenge to such a unitary national
               tradition. In addition to visualizing these alternative interpretations, the digital
               methodology can also illuminate the manner in which the text facilitates, and even
               invites, both such readings. For example, Figure 10 displays how the references to
               World War Two, marked by a number of participants as indicating an internationally
                  shared history, appear in close proximity to the brief textual discussion
               of the struggle for liberation in Ireland.
            
               
            
         

            Conclusion
            In conclusion, the fusing of digital humanities with literary methodologies of close
               reading, which is a fundamental characteristic of our research project, yields
               significant findings with regard to a literary-critical analysis of the chosen case
               study: Sebastian Barry’s The Secret Scripture. The
               complex operations of narrative voice in the novel — whereby the most powerful
               indicators of trauma are indirectly conveyed, and filtered through the therapist’s
               perspective — can be elucidated and the subtlety of the authorial achievement therein
               brought to light through the practices of markup and annotation. Such a technique can
               in turn inform a wider literary pedagogy, illustrating in close detail how form and
               theme work together; this may be particularly useful in teaching undergraduate
               students for whom developing a nuanced understanding of narrative technique is often
               a difficulty encountered in their initial years in literary studies.
            A further critically contested area with regard to Barry’s novel — namely its status
               as national narrative — is also illuminated through our linked literary and
               digital techniques of annotation (recording individual interpretative practices) and
               comparative analysis (the overlap function). As shown above, the processes through
               which indicators of cultural context, implicit or explicit, operate in the novel are
               central to the novel’s effect, not least through the varying ways in which those
               potential indicators are identified by readers. Here the reader’s own interpretation
               of what constitutes a marker of cultural context becomes the key determinant, and the
               degree — or absence — of consensus among different readers, a fruitful subject of
               study. Thus our case study demonstrates how digital methodologies can be deployed,
               not only to support generalist readings, but also to analyse how a novel may
               generate differing or shared specialist responses. Its wider significance,
               within the still evolving field of digital literary analysis, is to argue for the
               value of interlinked textual and cultural analysis that delves into the specificities
               of texts; contra Liu, block quotations still retain value as the objects of
                  sustained focus for digital humanities .
            The digital humanities objects, that is, the various visualization software, schema
               and XML encodings, have evolved in many stages through this iterative design process,
               and in step with the evolving research question; as a result, this paper presents an
               evolutionary chronicle of the development of our schema and methods. In the
               concluding pages of What is World Literature?, Damrosch
               predicts that those who work on world
                  literature are increasingly going to find that a significant share of their work
                  is best done in collaboration with other people
               . Those other people, to whom Damrosch
               refers, now include colleagues in digital humanities and computer science, working in
               collaboration with colleagues in world literature and literary studies; our own case
               study demonstrates the rich results that can be yielded for literary criticism by the
               collaborative work of an interdisciplinary humanities and computer science team
               whereby traditional literary methodologies can be re-activated and regenerated rather
               than abandoned.
         
