Title:  Ooligan Press: Building and Sustaining a Feminist
               Digital Humanities Lab at a R-2
Volume:  014
Issue:  3
Date:  25 September 2020
Abstract:  
            
            How can practitioners outside of R-1s afford to build a DH lab? How to connect a
               lab’s output to the communities it serves? This essay is a case study of Ooligan
               Press, a student-run trade press housed within a R-2, teaching-intensive university.
               Two elements make Ooligan Press distinctive as a DH lab. First, Ooligan is a
               not-for-profit business folded into a Master’s program in Book Publishing. Profits
               from sale of Ooligan Press books sustain the lab, which would collapse if its books
               were steadily unprofitable. Second, the essay uses the DH feminism M.E.A.L.S. framework to explain how Ooligan's horizontal
               management structure and student ownership of the press manifest in an ethic of care.
               Unlike most R-1 DH labs, where priorities are set by senior scholars and directors,
               graduate students decide which projects the lab will develop, and which skills they
               want to master in exchange for their labor. Because Ooligan is self-sustaining, it
               can also be self-directing.
         
Full Body Text: 
Ooligan Press is a full-scale, student-run publishing house that launches four trade
            books annually, the signature piece of a two-year master’s degree in book publishing at
            Portland State University. In addition to a final researched paper, an oral defense, and
            a digital portfolio, the degree requires 48 credits of coursework; eight of these are
            fulfilled working at Ooligan Press, though many students elect to invest much more time
            than that.Ooligan Press: https://ooligan.pdx.edu/. Portland State Master’s in Book Publishing
               program: https://publishing.pdx.edu/.
             At a cultural moment when some R-1 digital humanities and book history programs
            are exploring the materiality of moveable type letterpresses, such as the Book Lab at
            University of Maryland, Huskiana Press at Northeastern University, and the Rutgers
            Initiative for the Book,The Book Lab: https://www.english.umd.edu/BookLab; Huskiana Press: https://cssh.northeastern.edu/huskiana/; Rutgers Initiative for the Book:
                  https://sites.rutgers.edu/ru-book-initiative/new-rib-postcards/. 
            book materiality at Portland State, a Carnegie-classified R-2, is commercially oriented
            because the press needs proceeds from book sales in order to survive. 
Ooligan Press sells the books it makes because sales sustain the student experience of
            learning how to make books from start-to-finish: from title acquisition through
            developmental and copyediting, book cover design and interior design, marketing, ebook
            conversion, social media and events-based launch, and backlist management. Book sales
            are also a test of how accurately the student teams have gauged the market for the
            manuscript they acquired and made into a book. From 2015 to 2019, Ooligan Press was 27%
            profitable. That number encompasses the most recent seventeen titles published over five
            years, generating $124,993 in gross revenue and netting $33,206 in profit. Profits are
            reinvested back into the material costs of the press. As of 2015 to 2019, six of the
            seventeen titles are currently unprofitable; all of these were published prior to 2018,
            a 65% by-title profitability. The press is getting better at
               predicting success, but it takes a long time to see that in actual development
               because of the long timelines of publishing, notes former Ooligan Publisher
            and article co-author Abbey Gaterud. If Ooligan had a sequence of
               bad books (or rising expenses) we'd be in trouble. There's no safety net.
There’s no safety net might be the motto of Ooligan Press. It dovetails with the
            scarce resources and the accessibility mission of Portland State as an R-2, which is
            charged to Let Knowledge Serve the City: a core value so foundational to PSU that
            it’s inscribed in gold letters across a bridge spanning a main thoroughfare of our urban
            campus. Ooligan’s role in Portland’s thriving independent publishing scene is led by its
            ethical commitment to stewardship and community outreach. Initiatives such as Rethinking Paper and Ink, a sustainability guide to critically
            examine the book publishing industry; Writers of Color Spring Showcase, an annual
            event where local authors meet agents and publishers; Write to Publish, a one-day
            conference that demystifies publishing for aspiring authors; and Transmit
            Culture, a free and open-to-the-public quarterly lecture series about book
            publishing, all do the work of delivering accessible publishing information to broader,
            local publics. 
At points in its nineteen-year history, Ooligan has been on the verge of shutdown. That
            Ooligan is now slightly budget-positive accomplishes some goals digital humanists rarely
            talk about in the context of labs: how can practitioners outside of R-1s afford to build
            a lab? How to connect the lab’s output holistically to the communities it serves? What’s
            the role of a lab in helping students achieve learning outcomes they seek when they
            enroll in a degree program? These questions, centered on students and community impact,
            are often not within the ambit of R-1 labs. And yet they are a vital component of
            postgraduate DH training that merit attention and support.
DH at an R-2 is expressly tied to teaching and learning. At Ooligan, feminist pedagogy
            manifests itself in horizontal structures of power and built-in managerial overlaps in
            student responsibilities. We foster an ethic of care and mutual dependence. This ethic
            of care might be why Ooligan persisted despite funding calamities a decade ago, when it
            was on the verge of collapse. Today, the press’s acquisitions editors do extensive
            forecasting, including profit-and-loss projections based on sales data available for
               comp (comparable or comparator) titles. This forecasting allows Ooligan to
            guess more accurately which people, and how many, will buy its books, sales necessary to
            recoup the significant investment in printing. Printing costs are not a budget line item
            funded by Portland State University. Being self-sustaining shields Ooligan from the
            boom-bust cycles that can beset DH centers and labs, where there’s top-down money for
            startup but rarely for maintenance 
            . As Ooligan Press has become more successful at making books
            people want to buy, the lab has expanded its capacity, adding ebooks (in 2012) and
            audiobooks (in 2018) to the slate of digital objects that book publishing master’s
            students can learn how to make. 
In this R-2 DH lab, students decide which projects to develop, and which skills they
            want to learn and master as a byproduct of their labor. More traditional labs orient
            graduate students to objects of study or critical making that have been decided by
            faculty and/or lab directors. Ooligan Press vests even freshly-admitted newcomers with
            the same authority to speak in meetings and direct the goals of the press as more
            experienced students and faculty. This feminist principle is aligned with similar
            organizational efforts documented in panels like Feminist
               Infrastructures at the Allied Digital Humanities Organization’s 2016
            conference in Kraków, and the Feminist Infrastructures and
               Technocultures assembly at the University of California San Diego in 2013. It
            aligns historically with second-wave feminist social organizational practices, where
            women formed collectives and made books like Our Bodies,
               Ourselves, originally published in 1970 by the Boston Women’s Health
            Collective. It is a feminist principle that context and participants’ lived experience
            should factor into calibrations of value.
As DH field survey moves from the big tent
             to the expanded field
             (pace
            Krauss 1979) to, most recently, micro-domains where work
               is not always fully legible to those not versed in the
               particular methods or conversations taking place in that domain
            , we articulate Ooligan Press specifically as a
            digital humanities lab. The implied prestige of digital humanities has little impact on
            perceptions of Ooligan Press. Ooligan gains nothing particular from being recognized as
               DH. But DH has something to gain from locating a lab like Ooligan Press within
            its domain because as the field now includes R-2s, SLACs, small private universities,
            and community colleges, the field will benefit from developing nomenclature to describe
            how DH is practiced without the budgets, resources, and priorities of R-1s. A dearth of
            scholarly information about non-R-1 DH can be attributed to the lack of time and
            research money teaching faculty typically have to support writing and conferencing.
In their introduction to Debates in Digital Humanities
            2019, Gold and Klein call for work that exposes the impact
               of our embededness in [social, political and technical] systems and that brings our
               technical expertise to bear on the societal problems those systems sustain
            . Here’s a problem: how to make DH available to
            students at a chronically underfunded regional comprehensive university — students who
            are the most likely to have experienced the alienating effects of poverty, racism,
            sexism, ageism and homo- and transphobia? How to reveal the assumptions and ideologies
            expressed in off the shelf,
            frictionless software products made by Adobe, Google, Microsoft and Apple — not
            to mention the social media platforms marketing teams work in to launch books — if not
            by studying them using DH methods and tools? Our solution in the book publishing
            graduate program has been to integrate a technically intensive business as part of the
            curriculum and to give students actual power to perform work at every point in the book
            communication circuit 
            . Rather than the hierarchies of a traditional DH lab, where
            the most senior people retain the privilege of writing interpretive essays about lab
            findings , Ooligan Press students benefit directly and
            immediately from their own labor, in ways discussed below.
Some readers of this essay may disagree with the designation of Ooligan Press as a DH
            lab because its output is commercial print product, not a boutique tool or dataset. Such
            a position is understandable, but unwarranted. Technical engagement with Silicon Valley
            products does not stop or disincentivize students from performing critique of those
            tools and technical systems. Required coursework in the book publishing program
            introduces students to creative coding in HTML, CSS and JavaScript; text analysis; media
            theory; media archeology; and cultural studies in those contexts. This, coupled with
            required coursework in research methods, broadens the range of questions students ask
            about book publishing and equips them with scholarly training to answer them. In this
            essay we trace how Ooligan Press is intersectional in the lab’s human processes and in
            its nonhuman technical and commercial systems. In doing so, we are mindful of work by
            Tara McPherson, Miriam Posner and Julia Flanders, which framed for us, as Flanders puts
            it, the difficulty . . . in creating a single coherent account of
               the operations of diversity in theories about how ‘building’ operates in digital
               humanities.Flanders, Building Otherwise,
               in Bodies of Information (eds. Wernimont and Losh)
               292. Ooligan Press stands apart from the prestige economy stoked by colonial and masculinist lineages of inherited lab models that can have direct influence not
               only on the types of projects taken up by a lab, but on its overall ethos
            . 
The M.E.A.L.S. framework developed by Elizabeth Losh and Jacqueline Wernimont (2018)
            organizes the following case study of Ooligan Press: Materiality, Embodiment, Affect,
            Labor and Situatedness. We locate Ooligan Press in the lived reality of our students of
            all genders, most of whom work part-time jobs while also staffing the press, taking a
            full academic course load, interning at local Portland-area small presses, and — some of
            them — raising families. In doing so, we underscore the Value of inclusivity. (Losh and
            Wernimont added Values to the M.E.A.L.S. matrix in their introduction to Bodies of Information.) We three authors of this article, the
            full-time faculty in the PSU Book Publishing program, value the digital labor of Ooligan
            graduate students and offer this essay as documentation to join the work of recuperating
            women’s invisible labor in technical settings 
            . Such elisions might historically have been justified by
            declaring women’s contributions to be merely technical, not analytic.Overarching
               questions remain about the significance of the cultural,
                  intellectual, and social conditions that shaped the earliest work in digital
                  humanities by female punch card operators trained to work on Father Busa’s
                  Index Thomisticus. Although
                  further research is needed to uncover the role and responsibilities of women in
                  this project, Busa certainly depended on their input, and our work is to write
                  them back into the historical record, declare Terras and Nyhan
               (2016). Today’s variant on that diminution might be that the women’s technical
            proficiency is commercial, not metacritical when held to the standard of making
            boutique tools. The book publishing industry is between 74-80% cis-female 
            , and Ooligan Press’s students proportionally matriculate
            more female, nonbinary and/or and queer than the publishing industry norm. We hope this
            essay will help others think through how the humanities’ interrogative stance takes
            shape in the applied context of a book publishing program that sells books to survive
            and is run in accord with feminist principles of power. 

            Ooligan Press Within Book Publishing Studies
            Book publishing master’s programs are positioned within various departments. The
               location of PSU’s book publishing program within the English department on the one
               hand seems like a natural extension of the study of literature, but on the other like
               a strange marriage of humanities and social sciences. Indeed, scholars who research
               within the academic discipline of book publishing often draw from concepts and
               methodologies that are associated with sociology (such as Bourdieu 1993, Thompson 2012). It’s
               possible that one factor in the prevalence of sociological methods in book publishing
               is due to an effort to distinguish book publishing from literary analysis of the text
               itself. However, book publishing is very much a humanist endeavor
               because while both humanities and social sciences have human subjects, relationships,
               and interactions as crucial to the research and fields, the primary difference
               between humanities and social sciences is method — qualitative vs quantitative,
               philosophical vs scientific. For this reason, book publishing might be called
                  applied humanities, which demonstrates the pairing of conceptual and
               theoretical knowledge with practical application that typifies book publishing degree
               programs. Book publishing has a vocational tie in the same way that business schools,
               engineering departments, and other social and natural science fields prepare their
               students for work in the world. However, much like these other fields, book
               publishing is not only vocational.
            Only four other teaching presses exist, and all four of them are fairly recent
               initiatives, without the infrastructure, institutional history, and integration that
               are central to Ooligan Press. Bowen Street Press is part of the publishing master’s
               program at Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology in Australia (established in
               1988), which houses the oldest publishing program in Australia . Bowen Street Press is student-run, founded in 2016, and
               publishes primarily anthologies, zines, and magazines. Lamplight Press is the only
               student-run press as part of a publishing program in the UK, at Loughborough
               University, but Lamplight Press is for undergraduate students, not graduate students.
               Lamplight previously published 4 books a year, was self-distributed, and was founded
               in 2013, but it hasn’t been since 2015 that anything has been published at the press,
               presumably in part because the faculty member who founded and championed the press
               moved to a position at another university. The third example of book publishing
               teaching presses is New Rivers Press, based at Minnesota State University Moorhead.
               This press is not integrated with a book publishing program; however, it is a
               student-run publishing company, with distribution through Small Press Distribution, a
               trade book distributor that does not have the national reach that large distributors
               like Ingram do. The fourth example is Lookout Books, launched in 2011, a literary
               book publishing press located within the Department of Creative Writing at University
               of North Carolina Wilmington; students work in the press as part of coursework for a
               BFA certificate in Publishing. Lookout Books is distributed by Consortium (owned by
               Ingram). Of these four teaching presses, Lookout Books and Bowen Street Press are the
               ones that come closest to the kind of teaching press experience and output that
               Ooligan Press provides, but even that is a far cry from the national distribution,
               varied output, integrated systems, and longevity that characterize Ooligan.
            Book publishing programs assess student knowledge and prepare students for work in
               the publishing industry through individual book projects. This often entails a
               student taking a book through the various stages of the publication process (editing,
               marketing, design) and finally culminating in a printed and bound (or digital)
               product. This corresponds generally with a publishing program guiding and instructing
               students through the various aspects, agents, and processes within the book
               publishing workflow, value chain, or communications circuit [Darnton 2007, Squires and
                  Murray 2013]. Examples of programs that integrate final book projects
               include Drexel University, Emerson College, New York University, University of
               Stirling, University of Sydney, University of Central Lancashire, and Kingston
               University. Other programs utilize the publication of a student-run journal as the
               collaborative book project that culminates or at least contributes to the book
               publishing master’s degree experience. Examples of such programs include National
               University of Ireland Galway, Simon Fraser University, and University College
               London.
            However, neither of these culminating experiences (student-run journals or individual
               student-produced book projects) replicate the chaos, uncertainty, and changing nature
               of the industry. In other words, these hypothetical publishing scenarios and
               individual projects offer a small window into what publishing is and what publishing
               professionals do, but it’s only through a lab like Ooligan Press, with real time and
               money constraints and a constant influx of new problems to solve, that students gain
               and practice the problem solving, critical thinking, and reflection skills that are
               necessary in book publishing.
         

            Materiality
            Ooligan Press became a structured entity through a set of accidents and precarities:
               backdoor founding by a non-tenure track English department faculty member; little
               funding; grandfathered-in national distribution; and lab integration into the
               curriculum only because there developed a one-credit gap between graduate class
               credit hours (two classes = 8 credits) and the nine-credit minimum to qualify for
               loans and financial aid. These contingencies made Ooligan Press possible to exist,
               and shape its present-day characteristics. Such serendipity makes the press difficult
               to replicate in a top-down DH lab model. A bottom-up approach rife with contingencies
               led to Ooligan’s success.
            It is the core belief at Ooligan Press that students own the press. Being a student
               at Ooligan is to be responsible for the editorial direction of the press and the
               success or failure of the books we publish. Founded in 2001 alongside the master’s in
               publishing program at Portland State University, Ooligan Press is staffed by one
               full-time non-tenure-track professor (the Publisher) and a rotating cohort of
               approximately sixty students. The two other faculty in the program, Berens and
               Noorda, advise the press.
            Distribution services from Ingram Publishing Group give Ooligan’s books access to the
               same retail outlets and opportunities as major publishers like Taunton Press, Indiana
               University Press, and Granta Books. Without this access, Ooligan would be unable to
               sell the books it produces beyond what personal outreach to retail outlets could net,
               and would make its operations unsustainable. Through a connection with a community
               advisor, who was also the publisher of a local company called Graphic Arts Books,
               Ooligan found a new distributor through Graphic Arts. About a year after solidifying
               this relationship, Graphic Arts was partially sold to Ingram Publisher Services and
               Ooligan found itself lucky enough to be brought in under Graphic Arts’ wing. 
            This development turned out to be one of the best in Ooligan’s history: with the
               guidance of IPS’s experienced sales reps and with the clout of the Ingram name behind
               them, the books produced after this partnership quickly became more successful than
               any of Ooligan’s previous titles. Without a personal connection between two
               publishers, Ooligan would have struggled to convince such a large, nationally known
               entity to take it on as a client. Producing only three or four titles a year,
               Ooligan’s output would not be large enough to entice a major distributor. But
               Ooligan’s placement with Graphic Arts, combined with its singularity in publishing
               education, allows the relationship to be successful.
            As the press operations have matured over time, so have the digital tools used on a
               daily basis to improve communication, keep records, produce books, and maintain
               history. Adoption of these tools has been, like most things at Ooligan, organic.
               Early in the press’s history, Apple iMacs were procured and local licenses for Adobe
               Creative Suite products like InDesign, Photoshop, Illustrator, and Acrobat were
               installed to assist with print book production. These tools were purchased with
               one-time infusions of tech money from either the Dean’s office or the University’s
               Office of Information Technology. As ebook production entered the press’s operational
               scope, these tools, combined with other free programs like Sigil, BbEdit, Wordpress,
               and Kindle Previewer, were repurposed to make digital books. 
            Project management tools have been used since the beginning, but have become more
               integrated and sophisticated as freely available, high-quality digital tools have
               appeared on the market. Ooligan adopted the Google Suite of products in 2009 and
               quickly integrated the full function of Google Drive, Docs, and Sheets. Prior to this
               adoption, most production scheduling was handled by Microsoft Excel files shared on a
               PSU server space, leading to versioning problems and clunky access points. The Google
               Suite erased those issues, but brought new challenges of document ownership transfer,
               overwhelming numbers of documents, and difficulties in shared organization of files.
               To combat these problems, digital content managers in 2012 proposed adoption of
               Trello, a cloud-based and free project management software. Rolled out over the
               summer of 2013, the smooth operation of the press quickly became reliant on Trello’s
               kanban-board structure. Based on a standardized template board, project managers and
               Publisher construct a new board for each project after its author contract is signed,
               customizing it for the new project’s timeline and intricacies. 
            While book project managers are responsible for the life cycle of a book from
               contract signing to post-publication publicity, department managers — another group
               of second-year graduate students — are responsible for the quality of work in the
               more traditional division of labor. These managers work with project managers and
               team members on specific parts of the book’s life cycle, ensuring professional-level
               quality in the books. These redundant layers of management serve as a backstop
               against shoddy work and also against the problem of relying too heavily on one person
               to carry the burden of an entire project. Managers are often taking the four-credit
               Publishing Studio course, therefore ensuring more time in their course schedule to
               devote to Ooligan work; but they are also taking other courses, and often working
               off-campus jobs, raising families, doing internships, and simply living messy human
               lives. Ooligan’s structure allows students the space to be developing humans,
               sometimes needing a day or two off, while also ensuring that the work can continue.
               If a student does need to take time off from school for any reason, the book and
               author do not suffer in the long run. 
         

            Embodiment
            Ooligan is an experiential learning practicum where metacognitive reflection loops
               the practicum’s applied learning into academic coursework 
               and where academic coursework contextualizes the use of digital tools by providing
               theoretical and cultural frameworks for understanding their situatedness in
               commercial and other systems. Students present weekly project updates at press-wide
               meetings, teach domain-specific lessons, write midterms and final papers, and gather
               exemplary work they've made in digital portfolios. These academic outputs are one
               form of value at Ooligan; another is the hands-on contribution Ooligan Press books
               make to Pacific Northwest culture. Ooligan’s mission recognizes the importance of comprehensive representation and diversity, particularly within
                  the publishing industry, and [is] committed to building a literary community that
                  includes traditionally underserved voices. Ooligan encourages submission
               of works originating from, or focusing on, the experiences that
                  come from these people and communities within the Pacific Northwest.
            
            Students can, and usually do, take Ooligan coursework each term — WR574 Publishing
               Studio for four credits or WR575 Publishing Lab for one credit — including some
               summer-term coursework. This allows students to engage long-term with the books being
               published at Ooligan and also allows for two years of technical and problem-solving
               skills development. Students report that this long-term, in-depth involvement with
               book projects is one of the biggest benefits of PSU’s program: they iterate skills
               and build mastery that could not be developed over the course of one term in a more
               traditional classroom-project setting. 
            Since the press operates within the structure of a classroom but also outside of it,
               it has developed its current structure organically to deal with the unique challenges
               of running a business within a classroom. For example, the first Ooligan cohort had
               eight students; all students worked collaboratively on all aspects of the book
               production process, mostly in dedicated classroom face-to-face settings. Over time as
               the number of involved students increased, the organizational structure evolved to
               one that emulates that of the wider publishing industry, with departments structured
               around the main divisions of labor: editorial, design, marketing and sales. 
            
               Ooligan Press has six books in various stages of production at all times. Only
                  the Publisher is faculty. All other press work is done by students, 50% of whom
                  are new each year. Figure credit: Gaterud.
               
            
            As Ooligan grew in number of students and number of titles published, this structure
               evolved, with a switch to a project-based approach rolled out in 2011. The reasons
               for this shift were two-fold. One, students were given a broader understanding of the
               full process that a book goes through inside a publishing house, which came from
               curricular needs. The publishing program aims to give students a broad understanding
               of all aspects of the publishing process, and faculty found that students tended to
               silo their work and their exposure to areas where they felt most comfortable. To
               increase exposure to new and emerging fields in publishing — like digital content
               production and marketing — required students to work with an entire book rather than
               a department. Gradually their work would encompass all aspects of book production,
               thereby making their understanding of the process deeper and broader. 
            The second reason for a shift to project-based teams was as an effort to overcome the
               biggest hurdle at Ooligan: institutional memory. As one cohort of managers graduates
               from the program, the next one steps in over the summer term and takes full control
               of their project or department. The Publisher trains new managers to:
            
               Run meetings effectively
               Use the tools of production management (Trello, Google suite)
               Evaluate the production schedule over one term, and also the school year 
               Apportion work assignments to team members based not only on what needs to get
                  done, but also on the amount of time the team member has allocated to Ooligan work
                  based on their enrollment in Studio or Lab 
               Manage interpersonal communication issues
               Discern when to reach out to management colleagues or the publisher for help.
               
            
            While the work of the press is diffuse, spread among many teams, the need for a
               central organizing figure in the form of the Publisher became apparent. The Publisher
               serves as the instructor of record for Publishing Studio and Publishing Lab (plus one
               other graduate-level course per term) and the administrator of business matters
               relating to outside vendors, internal stakeholders, and community outreach. She also
               serves as the mentor to every student working within the press. 
            The work of Ooligan Press happens both in the classroom and outside of it. Twice a
               week for two hours, the class meets in various formats. The first hour (of the weekly
               four) is spent at the Ooligan Executive meeting, where all students working at the
               press meet and hear reports from managers and the Publisher about production
               schedules, weekly assignments, and departmental progress. Then for hour two, each
               project team meets to get new assignments, discuss work-in-progress, and
               troubleshoot. The work is collaborative, but also individual, with more advanced
               students taking on more responsibility and often serving as mentors and one-on-one
               collaborators to incoming students unfamiliar with the work or process. Managers
               grade their individual team members according to an established rubric.
         

            Affect
            The success or failure of a book heightens the stakes for student work in a real,
               tangible way. When a book is successful, a student can claim as much reward and pride
               in it as the author themselves. When Blue Thread by Ruth
               Tenzer Feldman won the Oregon Book Award for young adult literature in 2012, a dozen
               students and faculty were in the auditorium and erupted in cheers when the winner was
               announced. The same scene played itself out again in 2017 when Eliot Treichel’s
                  A Series of Small Maneuvers won the Oregon Book Award
               Reader’s Choice award. Students who have worked on a title can find their names
               published in the back of every Ooligan book on an Ooligan Credits page, cementing
               themselves in the book and author’s life long after they have graduated. 
            But when a hurdle is encountered or a mistake made, the real-world, human
               consequences are also felt at a deeper level. A project manager in 2017, after
               discovering a major omission in an already printed book, reacted with tears — and
               then a plan to address the omission — in a private meeting with then-Publisher
               Gaterud, and then a tearful confession to the press at the weekly meeting. A student
               in 2018, after leading the press to acquire a book that she had first heard
               informally pitched at a writer’s conference, told Gaterud that she’d never been
               prouder of herself in an educational setting. The stakes are real and the reactions
               are as well, something prospective students understand as much as graduates. Fifty
               percent of recent graduates cite the opportunity for hands-on experience at Ooligan
               Press to be the deciding factor in attending PSU, far more than location (16%),
               career prospects (15%), and even cost (6%).
            Publishing is a process such that each book can be conceptualized as a startup
                and those entrepreneurial competencies of tolerance
               of ambiguity, flexibility, and curiosity are all essential in real-world publishing.
               How to equip students with these entrepreneurial competencies? Experiential learning,
               like the student work at Ooligan Press, is a prominent approach in entrepreneurship
               education in the U.S. 
                and helps to develop self-regulated learning, where
               students are proactive in seeking information and mastering skills necessary to
               tackle a particular problem .
         

            Labor
            Overwork and passion for that work are material contexts for the students and the
               three full-time book publishing faculty who co-authored this article. Office
                  hours bleed into weekends, evenings, phone calls during our commutes to
               accommodate our students’ overstuffed work schedules. In thinking about the
               sustainability of a not-for-profit press and of ourselves, we invoke DH work on
               capacity, care and codework by [Bethany Nowviskie
                  2015, Fiona Barnett 2014, Lauren Klein 2015], and the many women in our networks
               whose overwork “for love” greases the DH gears. We book pub faculty collectively
               decided upon the necessity of making our invisible faculty labor
               infrastructurally visible and supported. In 2018, we revised the curriculum to
               require all students to take a research methods class; previously, training in
               research methods was conducted under the auspices of advising, which meant extensive
               office hours and emails outside of coursework. In 2020, we revised the curriculum
               again to permit students to repeat the research class because students were
               requesting independent studies to seek additional mentoring and time for research;
               Portland State does not pay faculty to offer independent studies.
            The book publishing program can offer graduate assistantships to only a small portion
               of the incoming class, which in turn impacts how many of our students take extra jobs
               and loans to earn their degrees. Personal financial risk is another messy
               condition that can’t be neatly excised from questions of labor, affect, and even
               embodiment: these bodies and minds can become depleted, particularly in the second
               year when management responsibilities at the press compound the pressures of a full
               course load and extra-academic jobs that pay the bills. 
            It’s unconventional in DH scholarship to valorize post-graduate employability, but at
               our R-2 where students typically fund their own degrees, it’s a vital context. We
               consider it ethical to insist, in a moment of pervasive and debilitating student
               debt, that employability is a relevant dimension of the training our program
               provides.
            
               88% of Oolies secure employment within six months of graduation that
                  allows them to use their publishing skills in a meaningful
                     way.
               
               76% find such work within three months of graduation, 
               35% find such work within thirty days of graduation. 
               73% of alumni report that connections made while students in Portland’s
                  independent publishing scene helped them land those first jobs.
            
            But employability is just one piece of the picture. The applied work of making books
               refines intellectual inquiry and research. Original research using data, thematic
               coding, and cultural studies features in 46 student essays published open access
               using the BePress tool via the Portland State University PDXScholar repository. At
               time of writing, more than 10,000 copies of student research have been downloaded.
               This itself is a significant contribution to book publishing studies and digital
               humanities.
            
               More than 10,000 downloads of 46 essays by PSU Book Publishing master’s
                  students’ have enriched scholarship of book publishing. The essays are housed in
                  the open access BePress repository PDX Scholar.
               A map of the Earth depicting the number of downloads per region of essays by
                  PSU Book Publishing.
               
            
            A sample of recent essay titles:
            
               A Cover is Worth 1000 Words: Visibility and Racial
                     Diversity in Young Adult Cover Design
               Coding LGBTQ Content: BISACs, Fanfiction, and
                     Searchability in the Digital Age
               Beyond BookScan: How Publishers Can Use Alternative Data
                     To Supplement Traditional Sales Metrics for Genre Fiction
               Tools for Nonfiction Developmental Editors
               This Is Your Brain on Editing: How Digital Tools Affect
                     the Cognitive Processes Behind Copyediting
               Approaches to Contested In-Group Terminology for Mindful
                     Editors
                     https://pdxscholar.library.pdx.edu/eng_bookpubpaper/
               
            
         

            Situatedness
            Book publishing master’s candidates aren’t just classmates; they’re also colleagues
               running and managing a business in an industry that runs on relationships and sells
               objects that are very expensive to fix if something goes wrong. Printed books cannot
               be easily changed, adapted, or modified once they have been solidified into a print
               object. A second edition might come out once the print run has been exhausted (this
               has happened only once in Ooligan’s nineteen-year history); otherwise, the print
               object is a fixed thing. Print’s fixity adds pressure and risk to the process. If the
               design of the cover is off by half an inch, then the entire print run includes covers
               that don’t line up with the spine. If there is a major editorial oversight in a
               chapter, that oversight appears in every copy of the print run. It’s a real-world
               scenario in which the stakes are high in economic, social, and symbolic terms. This
               fixed, one-shot opportunity to get the final product right affectively influences all
               those involved in the press in a way that would be difficult to replicate without
               Ooligan’s real-world uncertainties, and the pressure of knowing that Ooligan must
               remain budget-neutral in order to survive.
            The love of books first brings students together in the graduate program; loyalty,
               trust, understanding, and mutual dependence prompts the students to tattoo their
               bodies with the Ooligan Press logo, start new presses and freelance agencies
               together, engage in a myriad of personal and extracurricular activities together, and
               put in extra time and effort (particularly for press managers) to develop a sense of
               community and deep relationships. 98% of our graduates stay connected to the book
               publishing program via our mailing list and through our Facebook group (a private
               group is not limited exclusively to alumni). In an alumni survey, 70% of respondents
               said they felt connected to the graduate program in book publishing, in contrast to
               only 12% who felt connected to the English department in which book publishing is
               housed and 30% who felt connected to PSU as a whole. This sense of community,
               facilitated largely by Ooligan Press, contributes to why 91% of book publishing
               alumni feel that the graduate degree was a good investment of their time and money
                  .
         

            Conclusion: Applied Humanities
            Ooligan Press gives book publishing master’s program students digital humanities lab
               experience that trains them ethically, technically and emotionally in time-pressured
               and constrained real-world settings. Publishing books that the public buys is an
               extra-academic context in which to measure technical skills and rising confidence.
               Steven Lubar, the public humanist at Brown University asks: How
                  do the humanities change when we take engaged public scholarship
                  seriously? Rather than a plea for the more conservative, less socially
               engaged work Erwin Steinberg called for in his 1974 article Applied Humanities, we think applied humanities is a term that
               modifies digital humanities in a useful way, by suggesting that humanities
               work is always situated in particular communities who are served–or not–by that work. 
            There are two salient aspects of Ooligan Press as a digital humanities lab that this
               essay has contextualized. The first is Ooligan as a not-for-profit business that
               sustains experiential learning and extends digital humanities pedagogical approaches
               beyond R-1s. The second is feminism, and an ethic of care that makes space for
               student autonomy and press ownership.


         
