Title:  Managing 100 Digital Humanities Projects:
                    Digital Scholarship & Archiving in King’s Digital Lab 
Volume:  013
Issue:  1
Date:  26 April 2019
Abstract:  
                
                During the 2016–2017 financial year, King's Digital Lab (King's College London)
                    undertook an extensive archiving and sustainability project to ensure the
                    ongoing management, security, and sustainability of ~100 digital humanities
                    projects, produced over a twenty-year period. Many of these projects, including
                    seminal publications such as Aphrodisias in Late
                        Antiquity, Inscriptions of Roman
                        Tripolitania, Henry III Fine Rolls,
                        Jonathan Swift Archive, Jane Austen Manuscripts, The Gascon
                        Rolls, The Gough Map, and Inquisitions Post Mortem, occupy important positions
                    in the history of digital humanities. Of the projects inherited by the lab,
                    about half are either of exceptionally high quality or seminal in other ways but
                    almost all of them struggled with funding and technical issues that threatened
                    their survival. By taking a holistic approach to infrastructure, and software
                    engineering and maintenance, the lab has resolved the majority of the issues and
                    secured the short to medium term future of the projects in its care. This
                    article details the conceptual, procedural, and technical approaches used to
                    achieve that, and offers policy recommendations to prevent repetition of the
                    situation in the future.
            
Full Body Text: 

Digital Humanities (DH) research has reached an inflection point. On the one hand it
                appears to be in robust health, with an active community spread around the world,
                well-attended annual conferences, several well-established centres of excellence (be
                they labs, institutes, or departments), and new initiatives appearing on a regular
                basis. Activity is particularly strong in the United Kingdom, North America, and
                Europe, with significant work being done in Asia and Australasia, and important new
                initiatives developing in South America and Africa. University courses are
                proliferating at graduate and undergraduate level, and advances are being made to
                pedagogy . Intermittent criticism of the field is a sign
                of increasing intellectual vitality, as colleagues in neighbouring disciplines
                question its popularity and interrogate its intellectual, ideological, and ethical
                foundations 
                . This activity has appeared at the same time as the
                notion and utility of DH infrastructure has been questioned , and project teams have been forced to explore ways
                projects can not only be sustained but elegantly ended .
                Despite inheriting a relatively deep tradition, we are only beginning to understand
                the dense entanglements that accrue over time between digital humanists,
                administrators, and the web servers, programming languages, and tools, we use to
                produce our publications.
While technical digital humanities teams now have a vastly more sophisticated range
                of options than previous generations, including corporate-grade cloud services and
                free online services, this has done little to ease the problem of maintainability or
                sustainability - especially for high quality digital scholarship. Idiosyncratic
                solutions to specific research questions in this emerging field have left us with a
                legacy corpus developed from the 1990s into the 2000s, which raises new challenges
                in terms of sustainability. Problems that have been deferred for years, sometimes
                decades, have become pressing. A generation of legacy projects that need maintenance
                but are out of funding have reached critical stages of their lifecycles, an
                increasingly hostile security context has made DH projects potential attack vectors
                into institutional networks, heterogeneous and often delicate technologies have
                complicated the task of maintenance, and an increasing number of emerging formats
                have made archiving and preservation yet more difficult. This presents a
                significant, and growing, challenge for the community – and one that needs to be 
                resolved by raising awareness of the issues, evolved management of digital
                humanities infrastructure, attention to the full lifecycle of projects, and
                inventive approaches to funding that extend the life and impact of valuable research
                by sharing costs across funding agencies and institutions. This article aims to
                contribute to that process by initiating a conversation and explaining the
                experience and some solutions implemented in King’s Digital Lab (KDL) but does not
                aim to present a straight-forward How To guide for other teams.
                The realisation of robust and holistic approaches to the maintenance of digital
                research outputs is a matter of some urgency, but no single solution will work for
                every digital humanities team.
It is clear, however, that sustainable management of digital outputs that have
                survived beyond their initial funding has become a major problem. It is time to
                admit our problems and share our conceptual and procedural solutions. Such projects,
                although of central importance to the wider field of digital humanities and
                humanities scholarship generally, present a range of challenges. In the academic and
                financial year 2016-2017 The financial year runs from August to July at our
                    institution., KDL worked on 6–8 funded projects at any one time and was
                involved in external grant proposals with a total value of £26m (GBP), together with
                collaborators across a wide variety of universities and cultural heritage
                organisations in London, the United Kingdom, Europe, and the United States. This
                constituted the lab’s primary activity and is at the core of its raison d'être. In
                the same year, however, the lab completed assessment (followed by archiving,
                migration, or upgrade) of ~100 digital humanities projects undertaken over twenty
                years of activity at King’s College London and inherited from earlier
                instantiations of DH, including the Centre for Computing in the Humanities (CCH) and
                the Centre for eResearch in the Humanities (CeRch). Many projects were inherited
                from the Department of Digital Humanities (DDH), which the lab evolved from and has
                a close relationship to. This corpus of publications represents valuable and
                impactful research as well as significant investment from funding bodies, and
                research and heritage institutions. Humanities scholars rely on and make ongoing
                reference to the work contained in it, and
                it is increasingly being integrated into global Linked Open Data initiatives
                supported by libraries, archives, museums, and other digital humanities teams. 
Finding a comprehensive and scalable approach to sustainable development in digital
                humanities labs is a non-trivial problem. Any solution must be tailored to the local
                environment and help support not only the complexity and range of digital
                scholarship, but financial and operational issues and more fundamental problems
                related to entropy of software systems and digital infrastructure. It also needs to
                allow for the fact that digital tools and infrastructure do not allow for perfect
                process, perfect archiving, or perfect security: at some point it is always
                necessary to retreat to principles of risk management and cost-benefit analysis. The
                work presented here involved coordination with technical specialists, researchers,
                administrative and financial university staff, and colleagues in IT and the library.
                The developed process helped KDL transition many digital humanities projects from an
                insecure to a sustainable basis, but the work is incomplete and will - in a
                fundamental sense - never end. Some projects, moreover, cannot be
                    saved despite best intentions. Rather than aim for perfect
                process, KDL have chosen to accept archiving and sustainability as a permanent issue
                that requires ongoing care and attention. It has been added to the lab’s Software
                Development Lifecycle (SDLC) engineering process and is considered from our very
                first conversations with new project partners. Our experience is shared here to open
                a conversation and, rather than proposing simple solutions or demanding policy
                change, to invite discussion. 

                King’s Digital Lab: Background 
                King’s Digital Lab (KDL) was launched in November 2015 at King’s College London.
                    The lab evolved from the Centre for Computing and the Humanities (established
                        1995) CCH itself evolved from an initiative known as the Research Unit
                        in Humanities Computing, established in 1992. For more information see  and the Centre for eResearch in the
                    Humanities (established 2008), which merged to form the Department of Digital
                    Humanities (DDH) in 2012. At the time of writing, DDH delivers 5 masters
                    programmes, 1 PhD programme and an undergraduate programme to ~500 students and
                    comprises ~40 academic staff. KDL was founded to increase digital capability and
                    generate external grant income for digital projects within DDH, and across the
                    Faculty of Arts & Humanities as a whole: it is an independent Arts &
                    Humanities department in its own right, specialising in digital humanities
                    software development but increasingly working with social scientists too. Team
                    members sometimes act as Principal or Co-Investigators on grants but always work
                    in unison with colleagues in other departments and/or institutions, implementing
                    a model for digital humanities research at scale.
                Unlike core academic departments, which engage in teaching as well as research,
                    KDL is dedicated to research software engineering (RSE), and the implementation
                    of the systems, infrastructure, tools, and processes that are needed to produce
                    digital scholarly outputs. The lab has 12 permanent full-time staff to support
                    these activities: research software analysts, engineers, designers, a systems
                    manager, a project manager, and the director, and maintains its own server and
                    network infrastructure. The team work in close collaboration with the
                    university’s IT department and evolving University eResearch team. KDL’s
                    research philosophy is evolving: it lies at the intersection of human research
                    and technical systems, exploring and exploiting the creative synergies fostered
                    by this encounter to push the boundaries of digital humanities forward. Taking
                    an active interest in research methodology as well as inevitable business and
                    technical realities, the lab embraces problems we believe are integral to the
                    evolution and sustainability of the field.
                Conflating the scholarly and operational aspects of the lab is both an overt act
                    of historicisation - an acknowledgment of the reality of digital scholarship in
                    early 21st century higher education - and a pragmatic response to the inherited
                    and emergent issues outlined in this paper. The design and engineering of
                    software and its supporting infrastructures is a problem that needs to be
                    conceived as at once technical, political, economic, and human.
                    While the lab exists to engage in technical development, it is mandated to
                    explore the epistemic and methodological implications of digital humanities
                    development and can contribute to the broader field from a unique vantage point.
                    Its institutional setting, technical expertise, and exposure to research
                    problems that only time can generate positions it to explore fundamental issues
                    of digital theory and method (including but not limited to digital entropy),
                    while at the same time developing innovative methods for new research. 
            

                Legacy Portfolio
                The legacy portfolio supported by KDL is not unique, but significant for its
                    range and scholarly value: it represents a key corpus in the history of digital
                    humanities. Digital Humanities at King’s College is indebted to a group of
                    people who were instrumental in developing a range of projects inherited by KDL.
                    Colleagues like Harold Short, John Bradley, Willard McCarty, Charlotte Roueché,
                    Marilyn Deegan, and Paul Spence, were involved in a remarkable array of projects
                    of enormous scholarly value. In collaboration with PIs, both at King’s College
                    and in partner institutions, their work provided the core of the lab’s
                    inheritance including flagship projects such as Aphrodisias
                        in Late Antiquity, Inscriptions of Roman
                        Tripolitania, Henry III Fine Rolls,
                        Jonathan Swift Archive, Jane Austen Manuscripts, The Gascon
                        Rolls, The Gough Map, Inquisitions Post Mortem, Sharing
                        Ancient Wisdoms, Prosopography of Anglo-Saxon
                        England, Prosopography of the Byzantine
                        World, The Complete Works of Ben
                    Jonson, The Heritage Gazetteer of Cyprus,
                    and the Profile of a Doomed Elite. Work in
                    palaeography by Peter Stokes and Stewart Brookes has prompted a range of
                    projects, including DigiPal, Models of Authority, Exon Domesday,
                    and the new Archetype framework. Projects
                        URLs with associated Principal Investigator (PI) acting as current signatory
                        of the Service Level Agreement (SLA) with KDL: Charlotte Roueché (PI),
                            Aphrodisias in Late Antiquity (2005)
                            <http://insaph.kcl.ac.uk/ala2004/index.html>; Charlotte Roueché
                        (PI), The Inscriptions of Roman Tripolitania
                        (2009) <http://inslib.kcl.ac.uk/irt2009/index.html>; David Carpenter
                        (PI), The Henry III Fine Rolls Project (2009),
                            <http://www.finerollshenry3.org.uk>; James McLaverty (PI),
                            Jonathan Swift Archive (2009) <http://jonathanswiftarchive.org.uk/index.html>; Kathryn
                        Sutherland (PI), Jane Austen’s Fiction Manuscripts
                            Digital Edition (2010) <http://www.janeausten.ac.uk/index.html>; Anne Curry (PI),
                            The Gascon Rolls project 1317-1468 (2011),
                            http://www.gasconrolls.org/en; Keith Lilley (PI), Linguistic Geographies: The Gough Map of Great
                            Britain (2011), <http://www.goughmap.org>; Michael Hicks (PI), Mapping the Medieval Countryside Places, People, and
                            Properties (2012), <http://www.inquisitionspostmortem.ac.uk>; Charlotte Roueché
                        (PI), Sharing Ancient Wisdoms (2013), <http://www.ancientwisdoms.ac.uk>; John Martindale (PI), Prosopography of the Byzantine Empire (2014),
                            <http://www.pbe.kcl.ac.uk>; Martin Butler, The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Ben Jonson Online (2014),
                            <https://universitypublishingonline.org/cambridge/benjonson>;
                        Charlotte Roueché (PI), Heritage Gazetteer for
                            Cyprus (2015), <http://www.cyprusgazetteer.org>; Stephen Baxter (PI), Prosopography of Anglo-Saxon England (2010),
                            <http://www.pase.ac.uk>;
                        Dauvit Broun (PI), Models of Authority: Scottish
                            Charters and the Emergence of Government (2017), <https://www.modelsofauthority.ac.uk>; Julia Crick, The Conquerors' Commissioners: Unlocking the Domesday
                            Survey of SW England (2017), <https://www.exondomesday.ac.uk>. This work was
                    delivered in close collaboration with leading technical figures in digital
                    humanities in the United Kingdom, including many who now work in, and with,
                    King’s Digital Lab. At the risk of forgetting important contributors we
                        would like to acknowledge Miguel Vieira, Elliott Hall, Jamie Norrish, Paul
                        Caton, Geoffroy Noel, Gabby Bodard, Arianna Ciula, Neil Jakeman, Charlotte
                        Tupman, Ginestra Ferraro, Elena Pierazzo, Simona Stoyanova, Paul Vetch,
                        Tamara Lopez, Gerhard Brey (†), Raffaele Viglianti, Valeria Vitale, Eleonora
                        Litta, Zaneta Au, Hafed Walda, Richard Palmer, Alejandro Giacometti, Michele
                        Pasin, Faith Lawrence, Peter Rose, John Lee, Jasmine Kelly, Artemis
                        Papako-stoulis, Caroline Bearron, Osman Hankir, Felix Herrman, Martin
                        Jessop, Tim Watts, Brian Maher, Andrew Wareham, Juan Garces.
                Of the 100 projects inherited by the lab, about half are either of exceptionally
                    high quality or seminal in other ways. This is a sizeable
                        estate to manage, but the authors are aware of at least
                    one team managing considerably more projects, and more than one team who have
                    suffered serious security breaches because of unmaintained applications. Teams
                    struggling with the issues are located in the United States and Europe as well
                    as the United Kingdom, suggesting any issues with policy and approach transcend
                    national borders. We have chosen not to name them in this article, out of
                        respect for their situation. Such circumstances entail a considerable
                    moral bind: either ignore the demands of (some) project owners that their
                    projects’ digital publications and data continue in perpetuity and turn them off
                    (risking reputational damage and reducing the number of DH projects available to
                    users, more often than not initially supported via public funding), introduce
                    financial risk by maintaining them gratis (absorbing unfunded maintenance costs
                    and undermining other activities), or do nothing and accept the existential
                    risks that accompany a major security breach. 
                Little support is offered from the surrounding culture. Funding agencies might
                    require data management plans to ensure content is gracefully handled, depending
                    on the country of origin, but appear unable to deal with the complex issues
                    associated with the systems that generate and store that data. Collaborators
                    often become uneasy at the use of industry frameworks and
                        business language, suggesting (understandably) that it
                    detracts from academic research culture. Meanwhile, some critics of the digital
                    humanities appear to be unaware that a universe of very high quality, bespoke,
                    but at-risk digital scholarship exists far away from the values and commercial
                    imperatives of Silicon Valley ideology. See Allington, Daniel,
                        Brouillette, Sarah and Golumbia, David, Neoliberal
                            Tools (and Archives): A Political History of Digital Humanities.
                        Los Angeles Review of Books, May 1, 2016 for an
                        example of the neoliberal critique of digital humanities, and Smithies,
                        James, The Digital Humanities and the Digital
                            Modern. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2017 for a
                        rejoinder. In that sense, this paper is an account of a course
                    charted between Charybdis and Scylla, seeking to protect a cargo of scholarship
                    from technical and financial realities, the barbs of critics, the
                    corporatisation of higher education, and gaps in national policy. Were it not
                    for the fact that this is the precise set of operational tensions
                    that drives the intellectual and creative culture of laboratories like KDL, and
                    the support of an almost uniformly understanding group of project owners and
                    stakeholders, the combined pressures would be insufferable. Given this, we view
                    this article as an opportunity to articulate the issues facing teams like KDL,
                    gesture towards some of our solutions, and make it easier for other teams to
                    share their experiences and request the resources needed to mitigate issues.
                The ~100 projects inherited by KDL range across several DH sub-disciplines, with
                    a focus on Digital Classics (23 projects), Digital History (23 projects), and
                    Digital Literary Studies (14 projects). Another group can be best described as
                    Digital Humanities (20 projects), with smaller but important groups in Digital
                    Musicology (5 projects), Cultural Studies (5 projects), and Spanish Studies (4
                    projects). A further 5 projects are best described as inter-disciplinary. New
                    projects appear on a regular basis, of course, meaning the precise numbers
                    constantly shift. Surprisingly, and accepting that five years is a long time in
                    the digital world, 77 of the projects are less than 5 years old, with only 22
                    projects more than five years old. Of more concern is the fact that, when KDL
                    was established, the majority of these projects were
                        orphaned, and left without funding for maintenance. In
                    lieu of merely shutting them down, they had been kept live with little or no
                    maintenance, resulting in some unacceptably old operating systems remaining in
                    production. This is by no means out of step with the situation at many
                    organisations (commercial or otherwise). It reflects an era in the history of
                    computing when technological optimism was somewhat higher and security risks
                    somewhat lower than they are today.
                We would like to note, in this context, that our openness in publishing the
                    details of the situation is relatively unusual and should indicate the
                    importance we feel the subject holds for the global humanities and social
                    science communities, and the library and archival teams that support them. We
                    have a good degree of confidence the issues have been resolved, as far as is
                    possible given today’s environment and the evolving security threats it
                    presents, but – more importantly – feel it is time to have an open conversation
                    about these issues. Teams like KDL struggle with issues presented by myriad
                    pressures: it is neither fair nor productive for Principal Investigators (PIs),
                    funding agencies, and the wider community, to have the reality of those
                    pressures hidden from them. Significantly, rather than seeing such issues as
                    embarrassments, to be hidden from administrators, funders, and colleagues inside
                    and outside our institution, the lab recognises them as research opportunities
                    for developing enhanced methodologies. It can be noted, too, that this attitude
                    represents continuity with the history of digital humanities at King’s College
                    rather than a departure from it. Previous generations of colleagues, including
                    Harold Short, Marilyn Deegan, Lorna Hughes, and Sheila Anderson, tried to prompt
                    policy change at a national level (most clearly through the Arts &
                    Humanities Data Service, but also through regular connection with national
                    funding bodies and other organisations), but their efforts were not supported at
                    crucial moments . Our goal is to empower similar
                    teams to seek and secure the support needed to do their jobs, and contribute to
                    the development of guidelines, standards and policies that can guide digital
                    scholarship. This ambition needs to be seen in a wider context that includes
                    issues of not only technical and financial sustainability but equitable career
                    paths, ethical attribution, diversity, and DH in developing countries. 
                Although (again) by no means unusual, the details of KDL’s technical estate in
                    late 2015 would give many systems administrators sleepless nights. KDL projects
                    were running: Windows 2003 (2 servers); Windows 2008 (9 servers); Debian 4 (13
                    servers); Debian 5 (32 servers); Debian 6 (33 servers); Debian 7 (10 servers).
                    The preponderance of Linux servers reduced risk significantly,
                    but the age of many of them was enough to be a risk even before the potential
                    impact of weaponised hacking tools on mainstream institutional systems became
                    clear. All servers were backed up, onto older machines that were adequate but
                    not entirely fit for purpose, and a significant security breach could have led
                    to several days' downtime while the systems were restored to their previous
                    best-known state. It was initially difficult to communicate this to some project
                    owners, who were unaware of the need for infrastructure maintenance, and the
                    risks their servers posed. The WannaCry event prompted a marked change, however.
                    PIs who had previously resisted sharing responsibility for their projects’
                    security immediately allowed KDL to turn off servers until emergency patching
                    had been completed or (in the worst cases), both server and application had been
                    rebuilt. The lab was close to taking this action unilaterally, regardless, for
                    the good of everyone involved. The consciousness-raising that accompanied
                    WannaCry, following its impact on the UK National Health Services (NHS) and
                    other key digital infrastructures, made the process considerably easier .
                Solid security requires up to date and regularly patched servers, but also up to
                    date and patched application frameworks (the body of code that enables the
                    websites, databases, archives, and digital scholarly editions end-users interact
                    with), which can be equally difficult to maintain. As with the use of Linux,
                    decisions to build using open source tools lowered risk significantly but did
                    not eliminate the need for basic ongoing maintenance. 26 of the oldest projects
                    were built using Java, but 52 were built using the Python-based web framework
                    Django, which has proven to be relatively secure. When coupled with the bespoke
                    XML-based publishing solutions xMod and Kiln (used for digital scholarly
                    editions), security risk and associated costs were almost entirely removed - but
                    these tools could not be used for every project. The most problematic projects
                    in the legacy portfolio were built using PHP-based frameworks such as WordPress
                    and Typo 3, which were promptly removed from KDL servers wherever possible.
                    Exceptions aside, analysis of the lab’s application security validated and
                    renewed our focus on a more limited technology stack based on Linux, Python,
                    Django, and associated supporting tools. Other labs might undertake similar
                    analysis and conclude they should focus on a stack including
                    Windows and PHP-based tools and excluding Linux and frameworks like
                    Django (to better align to their technical history and capabilities): the issue
                    is a matter of systems maintenance and security, not a reflection of the
                    so-called 
                        programming language wars
                        
                    . Experimentation with a range of new technologies continues, particularly
                    in emerging frameworks to support augmented and virtual reality, but long-term
                    support is focused on the core tool set.
            

                Policy Context
                It is not our intention to propose national policy change in this article (either
                    in the UK or other countries), which requires more insight into the complexities
                    of strategy and funding than we possess, but it is important to note that the
                    projects inherited by KDL, and detailed in this paper, were developed using
                    funding that only supported technical development and limited post launch
                    hosting of projects. Limited or no support existed for significant post-funding
                    system maintenance. In that sense, the funders themselves signalled
                    that they did not expect (or were not prepared to support) the development of
                    long-term or permanent digital resources: without the goodwill of colleagues and
                    the host institution most of them would have been closed years ago. Their future
                    was often only discussed tangentially, elided in conversations between technical
                    teams and PIs during the development process, in the optimistic hope
                        something would happen eventually, and that either the
                    funding agencies would see the value of the scholarly assets being built, or a
                    national solution would be implemented to protect them – or, in the absence of
                    the realisation of such hopes, that hosting institutions would support them
                    gratis in perpetuity. PIs shifted emotional responsibility onto technical teams,
                    and vice-versa: actual contractual responsibility was normally left
                    undefined.
                With the benefit of hindsight this was unfortunate, but perhaps inevitable given
                    the lack of knowledge about the many intersecting issues in play. Many of the
                    projects hosted by KDL were produced during seminal years in the history of the
                    field, when flagship digital humanities projects demonstrated the potential that
                    digital tools and methods held for arts and humanities research, and they are
                    consequently of considerable cultural and scholarly value. The spirit of 1990s
                    cyber-utopianism - which assumed electronic media would be cheap and technically
                    straightforward to maintain, and that libraries would develop subscription
                    models able to support bespoke non-commercial projects - held back proactive
                    funding of archiving and sustainability initiatives .
                    Funding agencies and researchers alike assumed that their role was to prompt
                    expansion and illustrate possibilities, and that issues of maintenance and
                    sustainability would be resolved in the future. This attitude was
                    understandable, but it is having a serious impact on teams who have inherited
                    multiple high profile (and now unfunded) projects that are well beyond their
                    initial funding periods. That is not to suggest that earlier generations of
                    digital humanists did nothing to plan for the future, however. UK colleagues
                    often cite the defunding of the Arts & Humanities Data Service
                        Wikipedia contributors, Arts and Humanities Data
                            Service, Wikipedia, The Free
                            Encyclopedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arts_and_Humanities_Data_Service&oldid=820259813 (accessed
                        March 1, 2018). and the AHRC ICT Methods Network Arts &
                        Humanities Research Council, AHRC ICT Methods Network:
                            Supporting the Digital Arts and Humanities, 2005–2008. http://www.methodsnetwork.ac.uk/index.html. at the start
                    of the millennium as signal events that undermined the future of multiple
                    projects. 
                It is reasonable to view this as an international problem. Other UK digital
                    humanities teams report similar issues to KDL, and colleagues inform us that
                    policy gaps have created similar problems in the United States. The problems
                    exist in continental Europe but are less pronounced because of longer-term
                    commitments to infrastructure development and better alignment to STEM-based
                    initiatives that are actively exploring ways to improve Research Data Management
                    (RDM) infrastructure and processes 
                    . It is important at the outset to recognise
                    that the issue runs deeper than straightforward problems of IT service
                        delivery, however. In large part the issues inherited by KDL are
                    the result of a wider conceptual failure, and an inability (or unwillingness) to
                    search 
                        for critical and methodological
                            approaches to digital research in the humanities grounded in the
                                nature of computing technology and capable of guiding technical
                                development as well as critical and historical
                            analysis
                        
                    . If practical work in the digital humanities is to continue, this
                    attitude needs to be fostered, and extended towards the ongoing maintenance,
                    archiving and preservation of projects as well as their development. In an
                    article in Aeon in 2017, historians of computing
                    Andrew Russell and Lee Vinsel point out that the technology industry is so
                    ideologically biased towards newness that it glosses over
                    the need for maintenance despite it being a significant aspect of the
                    contemporary digital world . More pointedly in the
                    context of digital humanities, Paul Edwards et al note that sustainable knowledge infrastructures must
                            somehow provide for the long-term preservation and conservation of data,
                            of knowledge, and of practices… and that this 
                        requires not only resource
                                streams, but also conceptual innovation and practical
                                implementation
                        
                    .
                The issue has cascading implications for digital humanists and policy makers
                    alike. If digital humanities projects become known for not only soaking up
                    valuable money that could be used in other disciplines, but using that money on
                    unsustainable projects, the central raison
                        d'être of the wider tradition - using digital tools and methods to
                    answer research questions in the humanities - will be undermined. However, there
                    is no reason the worst scenarios (permanent loss of multiple flagship digital
                    humanities projects) should come to pass. As Smithies has argued elsewhere, a
                    wider view of digital humanities infrastructure, in its technical as well as
                    intellectual and ethical dimensions, can provide perspectives that aid not only
                    technical development and management, but the development of ethical
                    perspectives, and greater purchase over business decision-making and funding
                    policy . Only by exploring this wider
                    perspective can an appropriate understanding be gained, and supporting policy
                    developed. Patrik Svensson takes a similar approach in his recent book about DH
                    infrastructure . That book aligns well to emerging
                    trends in critical infrastructure studies , platform
                    studies , maker culture , minimal computing , and various critical and
                    philosophical approaches perhaps best described as 
                        epistemologies of building
                        
                    . 
                The problem is that this work tends to be only tangentially related to, or simply
                    ignore, the seemingly pedestrian problems associated with technical design and
                    development, archiving, and sustainability. Work on humanities research
                    infrastructure is often written by people more invested in the easy development
                    of new projects (and thus the easy availability of development teams and server
                    and hosting infrastructure) than their ongoing maintenance, which hinders rather
                    than helps the sustainability argument . The
                    situation is further complicated by widespread cynicism about large-scale
                    infrastructure development resulting from the failure of programmes such as
                    Project Bamboo in the United States , which aimed
                    to create a large national cyberinfrastructure in the humanities but foundered
                    due to poor requirements elicitation, a focus on service-oriented architecture,
                    and over-use of dominant STEM models. Geoffrey Rockwell is correct to suggest
                    that digital humanities needs to assess its own requirements, and not assume
                    that infrastructures designed for one purpose will fit another, but it is
                    sensible to at least align the digital humanities to approaches in other fields
                        . 
                The work of researchers like Deb Verhoeven and Toby Burrows, who explore the
                    political and aesthetic implications of large-scale Research Infrastructures
                    (RIs) alongside issues of sustainability and maintenance, provides a new model
                    for thinking through these issues 
                    . The value of such work issues from its
                    connection of DH infrastructure development and its maintenance with
                    sociological and anthropological work in infrastructure studies capable of
                    normalising technical infrastructure as a human and
                        community asset in need of maintenance and support, rather than
                    a technical artefact in need of service management 
                    . Well financed infrastructure combined with careful
                    requirements analysis, tailored to the needs of humanities researchers and their
                    local institutions, can dramatically increase the quality (and lower the costs)
                    of digital humanities support, maintenance, and archiving, but lack of technical
                    leadership has stymied development. Effort also needs to be directed towards the
                    development of best practice and quality assessment frameworks for digital
                    scholarship that include sustainability and maintenance at their core.
                These perspectives are informed by changes in the policies guiding the
                    development and management of STEM RIs which, although larger in scale, deal
                    with many of the same issues and are not as focused on technology as sceptics
                    might assume. A 2017 European Commission working paper on sustainable research
                    infrastructures noted the centrality of both people and technology to the future
                    of reproducible science , and a number of reports on
                    e-infrastructure at the European level and in the United Kingdom have made
                    similar recommendations 
                    
                    . The 2017 State of the
                        Nation report of the UK Research Software Engineering (RSE)
                    association overtly positions permanent career paths at the core of both
                    high-quality science, and technical sustainability . If
                    there is a failure of post-millennium digital humanities, it could well be
                    related to this human aspect, rather than anything overtly technical: setting
                    aside all other considerations, permanent DH development teams will resolve most
                    issues of sustainability and maintenance. 
                The experience of KDL suggests that the most effective strategy is to offer
                    open-ended contracts and then embed archiving and maintenance deep into the
                    culture of technical development, from requirements definition and the
                    identification of digital research tools and methods, through to infrastructure
                    design, deployment and maintenance. This is based on a conception of
                    infrastructure that moves beyond material technical necessities, templates, and
                    process documents (as essential as they are), towards one that acknowledges the
                    centrality of people, funding, ethics, technology strategy, software engineering
                    method, and data management to the long-term health of our research
                    infrastructures. This becomes even more pressing if we acknowledge the wider
                    epistemological and methodological shifts occurring across scientific and
                    humanistic disciplines, related to the emergence of data science but also myriad
                    new forms of research dissemination and product development. The community needs
                    to recognise that high quality research requires attention to long-term digital
                    sustainability if quality is to be maintained. This extends well beyond the
                    specifically digital humanities, of course, and relates to all
                    disciplines and interdisciplinary efforts that use digital tools and methods.
                    Importantly, the failure (or sub-optimal performance) of previous large-scale
                    infrastructure efforts supports the argument for greater attention to the need
                    for investment in human capital and process maturity alongside capital
                    investment. This suggests the need for a range of initiatives from institutions
                    engaging in DH activity and funding agencies supporting it, from the development
                    of viable technical career paths, to training in basic software development
                    methods: archiving and sustainability is only one aspect. 
            

                Software Development Life-cycle (SDLC) & Infrastructure
                A key part of KDL’s work concerns improvements to the engineering and procedural
                    frameworks that enable digital scholarship. Much like research, software
                    development rarely takes a linear path, and the relative volatility of the open
                    web and rapid development of new technologies presents an ecosystem within which
                    published work needs to be protected and maintained over time. Rather than
                    presenting a pristine environment for artefacts, the digital environment, much
                    like the physical one, presents challenges of an economic, political and
                    entropic nature. The precarious existence of artefacts in the physical world,
                    and the evolving responses from the research community to their preservation and
                    documentation, therefore inform our digital practices. To this end, KDL uses an
                    approach to the funding and management of research projects that considers the
                    complexities of not just the research, but also software development and its
                    ongoing sustainability in a changing digital landscape. While slightly
                    increasing initial costs, the benefits of this approach accrue over time -
                    particularly in relation to academic impact, but also medium and long-term
                    maintenance, archiving and preservation.
                To support this, the team have added System, Application, and Data Lifecycle
                    Management to our Software Development Lifecycle (SDLC), along with Research
                    Data Management. This has resulted in a process of analysis, development, and
                    maintenance underpinned by Service Level Agreements (SLAs) defined in
                    collaboration with PIs and management. The SDLC is based on the Agile DSDM®
                    method , adapted for a research context. A range of
                    archival products (static sites, removal of front-end, data migration, graceful
                    shutdown, visualisation etc.) are now considered at the initial requirements
                    gathering phase of projects, for implementation when funding ends. Although our
                    concern here is with archiving, maintenance, and sustainability processes for
                    the projects themselves, the work functions within a wider context of not only
                    ongoing research activity but software engineering process and infrastructure
                        management. Future articles are planned to detail our SDLC, which is
                        too involved to describe in detail here. It is based on the Agile DSDM®
                        method for those interested in exploring more. See https://www.kdl.kcl.ac.uk/how-we-work/why-work-us/ for a
                        high-level overview.
                The laboratory inherited significant infrastructure from the Department of
                    Digital Humanities (DDH): rack servers supporting 400GB RAM, over 180 virtual
                    machines, 27TB of data, and over 100 digital projects ranging from simple
                    WordPress and Omeka sites to ground-breaking scholarly editions and historical
                    prosopographies. At the time of writing a full infrastructure upgrade has been
                    completed, including the deployment of new enterprise backup servers and core
                    infrastructure that has upgraded capacity to ~1TB of RAM and additional disk
                    space running on Solid State Drives (SSD). Network capacity has been upgraded
                    from 1GB to 10GB. The new infrastructure has capacity for significantly more
                    than 200 virtual machines, and planning has already started for a renewal cycle
                    starting in 2023, to ensure continuity past the life of even the new
                    infrastructure. This information is provided less as an advertisement for KDL,
                    than as a reminder that sustainability requires maintenance of supporting
                    hardware as well as the software that is the focus of this article. Coordinating
                    maintenance of all levels of the technology stack requires considerable effort
                    when it needs to support more than a handful of projects. 
            

                Principles 
                Our experience suggests that, much as with traditional production and publication
                    of research materials of archival quality, digital projects benefit from being
                    planned and executed with their longevity in mind from the start. This often
                    involves updating scholarly content, but always involves technical maintenance
                    to ensure the publication remains accessible. This places additional importance
                    on consistency and transparency in approach, supported by effective
                    dissemination and internal peer review of technical documentation. Maintenance
                    and ongoing hosting of a digitally published research project needs to be
                    included in grant application budgets, reflecting the life-cycle of the project
                    beyond the date of publication, with a set of maintenance milestones determined
                    at the outset. This is not merely good operational practice, but an indication
                    of the intellectual maturity of the project. Proper understanding of digital
                    scholarship requires an acknowledgement of its entropic nature; the absence of
                    forward planning implies a misunderstanding of the object being produced at a
                    fundamental – perhaps ontological – level. KDL’s process is thus guided by a
                    desire to enable high quality digital scholarship, balancing technical and
                    financial issues with the intellectual and historical significance of the
                    project alongside a consideration of its impact, future funding potential, and
                    potential contribution to the UK Research Excellence Framework (REF). The
                    process blends experience with common sense, rather than being anything
                    particularly complicated. It also assumes, significantly, that not all projects
                    should be maintained in perpetuity. Some are better conceived as short-term or
                    even momentary interventions in the scholarly conversation, to be archived
                    online for the historical record but not worth the intellectual, technical, and
                    financial overhead of ongoing maintenance. Convincing PIs of this can sometimes
                    be difficult but the more they consider the wider epistemological context of
                    their work (and often more importantly, the methodological and even ontological
                    purpose of the output they aim to produce) the more open they become. The
                    realisation they don’t need to bind themselves to a project permanently -
                    forever concerned about its future maintenance - usually comes as something of a
                    relief.
                KDL’s archiving process (see https://www.kdl.kcl.ac.uk/our-work/archiving-sustainability/) has
                    been, and is still being, developed in response to emergent tensions between the
                    envisioned and manifest material, financial, and political conditions in which
                    legacy projects exist. As Paul Conway has noted, transforming archiving and
                    preservation practice entails fundamental decisions about how the practice is 
                        conceived, organised, and
                                funded
                        
                    . Our findings will ideally contribute to a conversation across the
                    digital humanities community, funding agencies, and policy makers with a view to
                    identifying and implementing (or at the least recommending) frameworks,
                    infrastructures, and funding mechanisms that can ensure the sustainability of
                    digital projects and their data in a way that shares the burden between
                    universities and cultural heritage organisations, and funding agencies. While it
                    is unreasonable to expect funding agencies to provide ongoing funding for all
                    projects, it does seem reasonable to ask their support for projects that are
                    managed according to transparent processes and accepted frameworks, that include
                    a range of archival approaches, and integration into Research Data Management
                    (RDM) systems that leading research agencies advocate greater use of . As indicated earlier in this article, we do not feel
                    it is our place to provide detailed recommendations here, however: the issue
                    needs ongoing dialogue and careful consideration across the community.
                By developing open approaches to the development of archiving and sustainability
                    frameworks, even if they are merely the least bad option , the digital humanities community might
                    aspire to deliver on the promise of earlier initiatives like the Arts &
                    Humanities Data Service and safeguard the future of both the community and
                    public investment in digital research projects. It is worth noting here that
                    additional technical work has been initiated behind the scenes at King’s
                    College, in a self-funded collaboration between the lab and the DH department.
                    The goal is to create a data lake of metadata and digital
                    objects collected over the history of DH at King’s, and comprising over 5
                    million digital objects, for use in teaching as well as research (see https://data.kdl.kcl.ac.uk/).
                    This is part of a commitment to the implementation of deep infrastructure to
                    support DH archiving, which will be aligned to institutional research data
                    management infrastructure and made openly available to the wider community. Work
                    is progressing slowly, as time and funding allows, but the goal is to create a
                    suite of approaches that can be used in the future.
                Digital curation has been described as a 
                        new discipline
                        
                    , evolving from archives and libraries tasked with assessing digital
                    material for collection, use, and preservation. KDL’s process for archiving
                    inherited legacy projects reflects this. Rather than
                    relying on rigid assessment matrices or requiring slavish attention to
                    cost-benefit analyses, it is self-consciously oriented towards relatively
                    subjective issues of scholarly and intellectual value and
                        cultural heritage value. These need to be balanced
                    against hard operational and financial realities, but it was decided relatively
                    early in the process that it would not be possible to create a procrustean
                    assessment framework that could be applied rigorously to all projects: the
                    heterogeneous nature of the projects (technically as well as intellectually),
                    the frequent mismatch between scholarly value and straight-forward impact
                    metrics such as web traffic, as well as uneven access to funding meant that a
                    more holistic - but still consistent and transparent - process needed to be
                    adopted. 
                KDL analysts therefore assess each project in terms of scholarly value, technical
                    complexity, security risk, maintenance cost, infrastructure cost, PI engagement,
                    institutional support, value to KDL, and value to King’s College London. Early
                    assessments used a tabular matrix to guide analysis, but this was quickly
                    abandoned as too limiting: recommendations are made in prose form, allowing
                    quantitative and qualitative issues to be taken into account. A brief
                        business case, including recommendations and costs, is then presented
                    to the Vice Dean Research, Faculty of Arts & Humanities, and a decision is
                    made. Problematic cases can be referred to the Faculty Research and Impact Team
                    (FRIT), and upwards to the Dean if necessary. The process, at this high level,
                    works very well. Simon Tanner’s notion of a balanced view, assessing value using both subjective
                    and objective measures, allows the lab to act as liaison between the projects
                    and University, and thus support the projects and the wider DH community . The key principle is that KDL acts as facilitator
                    rather than decision-maker, providing professional digital humanities analysis
                    to both PI and management. This requires resources to engage in due diligence,
                    willingness to steward sometimes difficult conversations, and occasional
                    recommendations that projects be archived rather than maintained in their live
                    state, but the process ensures all stakeholders have equal access to information
                    and that escalation paths exist. 
            

                Implementation
                It is worth detailing the effort required to work through KDL’s archiving and
                    sustainability issues. During the financial year 2016/2017, the lab undertook a
                    complete audit of all projects held on its servers, including inherited legacy
                    projects, and developed processes for realistic costing of their maintenance and
                    hosting. In tandem, the lab set up contractual agreements that supported the
                    reintegration of the updated legacy projects brought under Service Level
                    Agreements (SLA) into the broader production processes of the lab. During the
                    final four months of the financial year 2016/2017, one full-time member of staff
                    was dedicated to the implementation of the new processes, with the intention to
                    bring all prior legacy projects into current processes under SLA, migrate
                    projects not suited to further managed hosting at KDL to the university’s IT
                    department (ITS), external hosting, or a static legacy server, and archiving the
                    remainder. A pilot phase was conducted using the portfolios of two prolific
                    King’s College London researchers. Business cases for those projects were
                    submitted to the Faculty of Arts & Humanities, resulting in approval for 5
                    years’ support and maintenance.
                It quickly became apparent that lengthy documents could be replaced with
                    straightforward, fully itemised and costed Service Level Agreements
                        (SLAs), KDL’s SDLC templates are made progressively available in our
                        GitHub repository: https://github.com/kingsdigitallab/sdlc-for-rse. to
                    clarify the extent and duration of KDL’s commitment. These are now issued as
                    part of the release process of any project approaching finalisation and launch,
                    and discussed with PIs in the earliest stages of project definition. As the
                    pilot phase progressed, technical and supporting data about additional projects
                    was gathered, including historical information about funding, PIs/Co-Is,
                    external stakeholders, and infrastructure. This required the identification and
                    synthesis of multiple historical sources but enabled KDL to gain an overview of
                    the extent of the legacy projects, including dependencies and risks. The
                    information was collated and included in documentation that supported the
                    reintegration of each project into the lab’s active production cycle, whether
                    that be via managed decommissioning, migration, or defined support and
                    maintenance underwritten by key stakeholders. Based on this high-level
                    assessment, 29 projects were dealt with almost immediately in a first phase that
                    involved them being taken offline and archived by storing database dumps and
                    content files in zip files, because they were incomplete, or incurred security
                    risk out of all proportion to their scholarly value. For phase 1, projects
                        were selected on the basis of low research value and minimal complexity,
                        e.g. underused blog sites, orphaned pilot sites, low relevance to King’s
                        College and King’s Digital Lab (e.g. hosting of personal Wordpress sites,
                        conference sites without updates since the main event, etc). A template
                        email, offering four options (Service Level Agreement, migration to own
                        host, migration to ITS microsite (if a King’s partner), or archiving) was
                        sent to projects partners. Recipients were asked to respond within six
                        weeks, after which we said that permission would be sought from Faculty to
                        decommission the web resource. A further month from this, the site would be
                        decommissioned. The majority of project partners responded in a timely
                        fashion, and we successfully agreed on a future path for individual
                        resources. Others required only basic maintenance to make them
                    secure. A further 35 were scheduled for Phase 2, Phase 2, analysis of the
                        remaining legacy projects (more complex digital research outputs, primarily
                        REF-able and perceived to be of mid- to high research value) began with an
                        investigation within the lab to unearth institutional memory of the affected
                        projects. They were prioritised according to the categories SLA
                            supported (where no moneys would be charged to the project in the
                        contractual period), SLA paid (charged according to cost recovery
                        including overheads for services rendered over the contractual period),
                            migration (to static legacy server maintained gratis by KDL at
                        low cost, or to another host), or archiving (with AWS Glacier or
                        similar). Responses were requested within 6 weeks. and 35 for Phase
                        3. In the final phase, we aggregated preferred outcomes from the
                        pilot, first and second phases. Only legacy projects that were no
                    longer in active development were considered. Another class of project,
                    inherited from DDH but still in active development, were dealt with using a
                    different process. A second key document - the Statement of Work (SoW) - evolved
                    to fit a subsidiary need: to detail and cost work required to bring projects up
                    to an acceptable standard for ongoing hosting. That might only involve simple
                    server upgrades, requiring half a day, or several weeks of active development to
                    rebuild the site in its entirety. Although we weren’t aware of it at the
                        time, this approach aligns well to Matthew Addis’ notion of Minimal Viable Preservation, which recommends an
                            engineering approach to preservation that takes
                        care of straight-forward issues before moving onto more complex (and
                        therefore costly) cases. Matthew Addis. Minimum Viable
                            Preservation - Digital Preservation Coalition. Digital
                        Preservation Coalition, November 12, 2018. https://dpconline.org/blog/minimum-viable-preservation (accessed
                        November 28, 2018).
                King’s College London Faculty of Arts & Humanities approved all the business
                    cases presented to it for support of ongoing maintenance and hosting of projects
                    led by Principal Investigators at King’s College. It should be remembered that
                    the approved SLAs are all finite - ranging from two to five years - but equally
                    important to note that agreement was reached only after robust business cases
                    were produced, detailing the scholarly and cultural heritage value, the
                    significance to the Research Excellence Framework (REF), the
                        brand value to the university, and the PI’s future
                    career. This created a new, and essential, level of clarity and made the value
                    of the projects more apparent. The process, which made cost, value, and mutual
                    expectations transparent, was a necessary first step towards the faculty
                    managing its digital assets in a more transparent and cost-effective way, and in
                    alignment to its wider strategic direction. It is perhaps not an ideal solution,
                    which would involve limitless funds and assurances of perpetual support, but it
                    is practical and (we think) sensible given the complexities of long-term
                    technology management and the need to accept competing needs for finite
                    funds.
                If some projects are eventually moved towards archiving, a decommissioning
                    process is followed, aligned with wider university research data management
                    requirements. It is highly unlikely now that any projects will simply disappear.
                    At the very least their data and a public metadata record will be retained: the
                    future of each project can be discussed on a case-by-case basis. Enhanced
                    transparency has also facilitated co-funding arrangements (between College,
                    Faculty, Department, external partner, and funder, for example), reducing the
                    average SLA cost of ~£2000 GBP per year to an extremely reasonable level for
                    each party. It is equally important to note that KDL is currently authorised to
                    charge maintenance and hosting at cost recovery level, far below commercial
                    rates (this is the case for normal project work too). This might need to be
                    adjusted in future years, to manage demand if nothing else, but was a crucial
                    element in explaining and justifying the archiving and sustainability projects
                    to colleagues.
                The process has made us keenly aware of gaps in contemporary funding models,
                    which would ideally incentivise projects to manage their future according to
                    similarly transparent and flexible models, but instead incentivise researchers
                    to produce orphan projects with uncertain futures. If a
                    tone of frustration is detected in this article it stems from the relatively
                    common-sense nature of the solutions, coupled with the significant stress placed
                    on teams like KDL by a lack of robust policy. This is not to criticise funding
                    agencies, who have been learning about the implications of digital scholarship
                    alongside the communities they serve (they do an excellent job, with limited
                    resources) but it is important to recognise the human cost of poorly managed
                    projects and infrastructure. It is concerning that recent updates to the UK Arts
                    & Humanities Research Council (AHRC) grant application process is likely to
                    worsen rather than improve the situation in that country, by requiring data
                    management plans but nothing related to system quality, infrastructure, or
                    lifecycle management.
                Conversations with PIs outside King’s College London were often the most
                    difficult, as is to be expected given differences in administrative alignment
                    and awareness of KDL as a new initiative. Expectations of ongoing hosting and
                    maintenance were often ill-defined, and reliant on memory rather than crisp
                    documentation: a result, again, of the loose requirements for archiving and
                    sustainability in past years, as well as changes in personnel and restructuring.
                    In many cases, the production of a SLA was all that was required for the PI to
                    request support from their university (so that they had a simple document to
                    present to administrative teams, usually with only a modest cost attached). If
                    it could be demonstrated that a King’s staff member was closely involved in the
                    project or stood to benefit from its ongoing maintenance, King’s College London
                    would support a proportion of the SLA. Discussions could become difficult in
                    more complex cases, such as when significant work needed to be undertaken to
                    upgrade the project, or maintenance costs were above the average (normally due
                    to significant use of disk space) but all PIs, internal and external, were
                    offered three scenarios: 
                        Service Level Agreements, and (where appropriate) software updates,
                            which guaranteed hosting, regular software maintenance, and server
                            updates under renewable two to five-year contracts, costed on the basis
                            of individual project requirements and including Statements of Work
                            (SoWs), when required, for necessary additional upgrade work. 
                        For non-King’s staff, migration to the partner institution for local
                            hosting. 
                        Archiving of websites no longer in active use. This option did not
                            result in the destruction of research data and could entail rendering
                            websites static for migration to a legacy server, or packaging for
                            archival storage. 
                    
                The last option can present problems, given the complexity of some of the
                    projects and the state of the art in digital archiving. Technical issues abound.
                    A range of archival solutions have been considered, ranging
                    from removing complex front-end websites and archiving data, to software
                    emulation, and packaging sites as virtual machines for offline use. The basic
                    philosophy is to embrace heterogeneity of archival solutions, in line with the
                    heterogeneity of the projects themselves. Bespoke approaches are developed on a
                    case-by-case basis, although always in alignment with wider university, national
                    and (where appropriate) international infrastructure initiatives.
                Other initiatives are being considered too. At the time of writing, KDL is
                    discussing an arrangement with the British Library National Web Archive to
                    improve technical and procedural alignment. King’s Research Data Management
                    system is likely to be used for preservation of raw research data along with the
                    lab’s own server infrastructure. A project has been completed with the British
                    Museum to produce static sites (more conducive to future archiving) from one of
                    their legacy projects , and a collaboration with
                    Stanford University Press is exploring new modes of digital publishing to
                    balance advanced features with sustainability and maintainability . The internal project referred to above, with the
                    Department of Digital Humanities, aims to aggregate Digital Humanities content
                    stored at King’s College and making it publicly available for reuse so that even
                    if some projects do lose their active web presence, their data will still be
                    accessible. The lab is beginning to consider in some technical detail the
                    different options available for archiving and preservation, including the
                    difference between presentation and data layers, the possibility of preserving
                    functionally limited but usable static websites rather than
                    complete systems, the possibility of packaging publications into downloadable
                        virtual machines that can be run on the desktop, and
                    coupling all of these approaches with snapshots stored in
                    the British Library National Web Archive and Internet Archive. The work
                    described in this paper only becomes tractable through a range of solutions, in
                    other words, conducted using a research-oriented frame of mind that seeks to
                    embed archiving and preservation deeply within core digital humanities theory,
                    method, practice, and policy. Improved policy and infrastructure at a national
                    level would help significantly, but this is a multi-faceted issue that will
                    require broad-based input and support.
                When it was clear the best possible approach to assessment had been found,
                    transparent processes were in place, and clear options determined, emails were
                    sent to PIs en masse to accelerate phases Two
                    and Three. It had become essential the assessment process not drag on,
                    undermining the future of the lab, so there was a degree of nervousness about
                    potential responses. In the initial email to project partners, a deadline for
                    responses within 6 weeks from the sending date was given, after which Faculty
                    would be notified of the status of the resource. After a further month, the
                    permission would be sought from Faculty to archive the projects of
                    non-responsive project partners. This timeline was clearly set out in the emails
                    and followed to the letter. Responses were largely swift and positive, allowing
                    mutually acceptable solutions to be identified in collaboration. Project
                    partners generally responded to initial contact well within the stated time, and
                    often immediately. Responses were broadly appreciative, and the rationale for
                    putting older digital research outputs on secure footing appeared intuitively
                    clear. This raises the question of whether resistance to adopting best practice
                    across the wider research community is exaggerated: it is perhaps more the case
                    that robust methods and clear processes are lacking, and funding policy acts
                    against their development. 
                 The lab’s attitude, enabled by decisions made within Faculty, prompted progress.
                    King’s Digital Lab operates on a non-profit basis (with accordingly slim
                    margins), so one of the most fundamental stages in assessment of the legacy
                    projects was the audit of not just the digital resources held on KDL servers,
                    but also defining the costs involved in their responsible ongoing management and
                    hosting. In this sense the lab performed an administrative and communicative
                    role, rather than acting as judge and jury. The inherently positive nature of
                    the process made it more likely PIs would respond well and allowed the lab to
                    streamline the further processing of legacy projects, and minimise detailed
                    negotiation and problem solving for which there is limited resource. The aim was
                    to conclude the financial year of 2016/2017 with no undocumented or out of
                    contract legacy projects remaining on KDL servers, and all legacy projects that
                    were neither migrated nor archived being brought under Service Level
                    Agreements.
                That was not completely achieved, but results were satisfactory. At the time of
                    writing all assessment and decision­making has been completed, Service Level
                    Agreements are in place for projects that are to remain hosted on KDL servers,
                    migration has occurred or is scheduled for other projects, and archiving of the
                    remainder will occur when time and resource allows. Given no perfect final state
                    will ever be reached the initial task of rationalising and safeguarding the
                    lab’s project inheritance can be considered to be complete. The newly
                    established processes will be used to manage the lab’s project estate for the
                    foreseeable future. Security risk has been brought within significantly more
                    acceptable tolerances. At the end of the process dozens of once uncertain
                    projects will have been given clarity, and a valuable corpus of digital
                    humanities projects will have been brought under robust management.
                    Surprisingly, given the anxiety that attended the start of the initiative, 46%
                    of the projects were placed under Service Level Agreements, guaranteeing between
                    three and five years of secure maintenance and hosting. Where the end date of
                    projects passed less than five years ago, the lab issued backdated, zero-cost
                    Service Level Agreements, itemised with future costs for each component, to
                    clearly signpost future hosting and maintenance needs. This effectively gave
                    several major projects no-cost extensions to their hosting and maintenance, as
                    well as giving them time to consider their options and plan for the future. At
                    least two significant sites will be rebuilt using new funding, and several
                    others will be subject to follow-on funding proposals. It is worth mentioning
                    that a very small subset of projects (five in total) await full resolution,
                    while discussions around creative funding (e.g. crowdfunding and archiving
                    options) continue.
                In conjunction with the upgrade to KDL’s core infrastructure, this gives our
                    community 3-5 years to continue seeking new options and align to evolving
                    archiving and preservation efforts in the wider research data management and
                    eResearch communities . 39% of the inherited
                    projects have been archived in some form, 13% on a static HTML legacy server
                    that allows their basic content to remain live but incurs no further
                    maintenance, and 26% on local backup servers. No data, in the form of image
                    files or otherwise, has been removed from potential circulation. Plans are in
                    place to migrate the remaining 15% of the projects to other institutions, in a
                    very pleasing move that signals that they also see the value in investing in the
                    future of digital scholarship. 6% will be migrated to a WordPress service hosted
                    in King’s College IT department, and 9% will be migrated to external hosting
                    providers. The onward cost of our current project archiving services are
                    negligible; local backup is supported from baseline operating costs, and the
                    running cost of the two static HTML legacy servers is ~£600 per annum. The major
                    costs, naturally, stem from the 12 months of effort, including 4 months with a
                    dedicated full-time team member, to undertake assessment, produce documentation,
                    and communicate with PIs. It is possible that significant additional costs will
                    appear when more complex sites need to be archived, too, but these cases will
                    appear in a staggered way and therefore be more manageable as part of the lab’s
                    normal software development and maintenance process. The end result, in simple
                    terms, is KDL’s new maintenance schedule: a list of ~50 projects, all
                    covered by Service Level Agreements and generating modest internal and external
                    income to offset costs. Concerns remain about some projects, and others remain
                        in process, but that – in our estimation – is the best that can be
                    expected: maintenance and archiving of digital scholarship is an iterative,
                    continuous process, that does not allow for perfect endings.
            

                Conclusion
                King’s Digital Lab has implemented pragmatic processes that take into account the
                    human, as well as the technical, financial and political perspectives implicit
                    in digital scholarship. It has reinforced the lab’s commitment to producing
                    digital research within a holistic and scalable framework, supported by
                    straightforward documentation to ensure mutual clarity about what can be
                    expected from research partnerships. A key component of this framework includes
                    the enhanced Software Development Lifecycle (SDLC) process, which is now
                    implemented from the inception of a project, to align its development with
                    post-publication maintenance and, where appropriate, archiving plans. Early
                    clarity about the feasibility and cost of maintaining projects beyond the funded
                    period allows all parties time to plan ahead, with sufficient time to
                    accommodate the development and turnaround time of follow-on funding
                    applications, negotiations with partner institutions, infrastructure resourcing
                    and requisite allocation of staff time. In addition to optimising maintenance
                    and management of legacy digital research outputs, this approach minimises
                    ambiguity regarding responsibilities and expectations, and contributes to
                    reputation risk management in more than one dimension. Contrary to what might
                    have been expected, KDL’s experience of introducing the level of transparency
                    and process described in this article was almost uniformly positive. 
                Successive generations of software (to support visualisation, AR/VR) and other
                    efforts to enhance research methodologies and impact mean the urgency of the
                    questions addressed in this paper is unlikely to diminish in future years,
                    requiring ongoing interrogation of what is an ideal
                    technology stack, and best practice. While experimentation with new technology
                    is vital and the precise details of future process design cannot be rigidly
                    determined, more attention to its sustainability, particularly where there is
                    significant investment from public funds, will enhance the field, enhance the
                    benefits of interdisciplinary collaboration outside of the Arts and Humanities,
                    and strengthen arguments for robust funding of the digital humanities sector.
                    Here, it is necessary to differentiate between established technologies and
                    experimental ones. We need to accept brittle code and the possibility of failure
                    in the shorter term for developing technologies but incubate emerging
                    technologies within a context of legacy risk assessment informed by
                    industry standards and including upfront analyses of wider infrastructures and
                    technological limitations. Software sustainability will, in all likelihood,
                    remain a pressing issue for the foreseeable future across all research
                    disciplines. The broader conclusion from the experience of KDL is that entropic
                    factors should be taken into account at early planning stages and be accepted by
                    all parties to the project including PIs, developers, and funders. Here, the
                    degree of orientation towards (or away from) archiving and sustainability are
                    core concerns. Funding and associated policy is central to sustainable
                    development, maintenance and archiving. Assuming that future technologies will
                    make it easier or cheaper to solve problems associated with digital entropy is
                    no longer adequate. Sustainable funding strategies need to be based on
                    transparent costing that includes infrastructure and maintenance costs and made
                    simpler and more reliable by established best practice. For this to be
                    effective, realistic costing methods need to be developed and shared between
                    product partners, and embedded within funding policy.
            

                Acknowledgements
                King’s Digital Lab is indebted to the many PIs who initiated and led the projects
                    described in this paper. Special thanks to Harold Short and colleagues (too many
                    to list) in the Centre for Computing and the Humanities (CCH), Centre for
                    eResearch (CERCH), and Department of Digital Humanities (DDH) for many years of
                    ground-breaking work. We would also like to thank Paul Readman, and King’s
                    College London Faculty of Arts & Humanities, for their generous support and
                    wise counsel in establishing King’s Digital Lab. Paul Readman, Tobias Blanke,
                    Charlotte Roueché, Paul Spence, Simon Tanner, and anonymous DHQ reviewers provided valuable feedback on drafts of the article.
                
            
