Title:  The Media Ecology Project: Collaborative DH Synergies to
          Produce New Research in Visual Culture History
Volume:  015
Issue:  1
Date:  05 March 2021
Abstract:  
        This essay details the development and current NEH-funded research goals of The Media
          Ecology Project (MEP), directed by Prof. Mark Williams and designed by Dr. John Bell at
          Dartmouth. The virtuous cycle of access, research, and preservation that MEP realizes is
          built upon a foundation of technological advance (software development) plus large-scale
          partnership networks with scholars, students, and institutions of historical memory such
          as moving image archives. The development of our Onomy vocabulary tool and NEH-funded
          Semantic Annotation Tool (SAT) are detailed, including their application in two
          advancement grants from the NEH regarding 1) early cinema history, and 2) television
          newsfilm that covered the civil rights movement in the U.S.
        MEP is fundamentally 1) a sustainability project that 2) develops literacies of moving
          image and visual culture history, and 3) functions as a collaborative incubator that
          fosters new research questions and methods ranging from traditional Arts and Humanities
          close-textual analysis to computational distant reading. New research questions in
          relation to these workflows will literally transform the value of media archives and
          support the development of interdisciplinary research and pedagogy/curricular goals (e.g.,
          media literacy) regarding the study of visual culture history and its legacies in the 21st
          century.
      
Full Body Text: 

        
        This essay is dedicated with respect to the legion of significant Film and Media
            Studies scholars who passed away during the time it was written: Eileen Bowser, Edward
            Branigan, Thomas Elsaesser, Jonathan Kahana, Paul Spehr, Bernard Stiegler, Peter
            Wollen.
      

        Introduction
        Our moving image heritage is at enormous risk. Moving image archivists and digital
          repository advocates are developing solutions to these problems, but we cannot sustain
          interest in preservation without a better sense of the historical
          value of these materials. Access is not enough; new knowledge
          production is required in order to connect archival materials with audiences and
          accelerate preservation efforts. The Digital Humanities must move concertedly forward to
          engage visual culture with the same dedication and technological ingenuity it has brought
          to the study of word culture.
        
          Logo of MEP
          
        
        The Media Ecology Project (MEP) is a digital resource at Dartmouth directed by Prof. Mark
          Williams that enables researchers across disciplines to access moving image collections
          online for scholarly use. Dr. John Bell (Dartmouth ITC) has designed and built the overall
          technical architecture for MEP. MEP promotes the study of archival moving image
          collections, enhances discovery of relevant corpora within these archives, and develops
          cross-disciplinary research methods. These efforts help ensure the survival of these
          collections via new published scholarship, plus contributions of metadata and research on
          studied corpora back to the archival community. The virtuous cycle of access, research,
          and preservation that MEP realizes is built upon a foundation of technological advance
          (software development) plus large-scale partnership networks that result in new practical
          applications of digital tools. This article will demonstrate the steady progress toward
          these MEP goals and designs as a DH project, present reflections about the significant
          emergence of visual culture DH, and posit certain directions forward.
        With internal support at Dartmouth and especially support from the National Endowment for
          the Humanities, MEP has developed several digital tools that support and sustain the
          creation of new networked scholarship and pedagogy about archival moving image materials.
          These include:
        
          The Semantic Annotation Tool (SAT), which enables the creation of time-based
            annotations for specific geometric regions of the motion picture frame.
          Onomy.org, which is a vocabulary-building tool that helps to grow and refine shared
            vocabularies for tags applied to time-based annotations.
        
        Together, these two tools support close textual analysis of moving pictures based on
          time-based annotations Annotations denote a start time and stop time for a subclip, a
          description and tags related to that clip, and attribution for its creator. This granular
          approach to media literacy and scholarly annotation is flexible enough to be applied to
          many types of research and analysis.
        MEP is fundamentally 1) a sustainability project that 2) develops literacies of moving
          image and visual culture history, and 3) functions as a collaborative incubator that
          fosters new research questions and methods ranging from traditional Arts and Humanities
          close-textual analysis to computational distant reading. The deployment of close textual
          analysis is a critical aspect of MEP in developing media literacies within DH. It realizes
          a practical response to concerns about the acceleration of contemporary culture, the
          related speed-read dynamics of many audiences, and vacancies of historical and aesthetic
          insight as a factor of modern consumerist behaviors 
          
          .­­­ Enabling a spectrum of purposeful and reflective
          considerations of the mediated past is keenly recognized to be pressing and necessary.
        At the other end of the methodological spectrum, MEP's work with computer scientists has
          produced new tools supporting machine-reading of moving images, which produce an expansion
          of time-based annotations that require lucid and informed evaluation. One direction of
          this research produces feature extraction (isolating specific formal and aesthetic
          features of moving images), while another uses deep learning approaches employing
          convolutional neural networks to identify objects and actions in motion pictures. Data
          from these tools can be critically assessed and collated with the
            manual (human-produced) annotation tools mentioned above to create
          synthetic and iterative research workflows that learn across the
          disciplines. SAT enables real-time playback of all annotations.
        While developing MEP as a rather distinctive Digital Humanities project, we have learned
          first-hand several key lessons about this important and emerging field. Because we are
          building MEP from an Arts and Humanities perspective, we recognize that our goals must
          always be framed to raise awareness about the significance of cultural-critical
          perspectives within the various institutions that we have engaged (archives, libraries,
          universities, grant resources, etc.).
        Like many in DH, we underscore the need for collegiality and connectedness in pursuing
          collaborative work that depends upon openness and mutual respect as well as a balanced
          critical eye. This corollary of the MEP profile as a virtuous cycle is echoed in Kathleen
          Fitzpatrick's recently published call for generous thinking
          . Everyone who engages in MEP is at some level working
          outside their comfort zones: across disciplines, across expertise, across vocabularies. In
          a very real sense we are engaged in translation work, the great
          benefit of which can be experimentation regarding methodologies of study but also in
          infrastructural designs of work-flow and output.
        New research questions in relation to these workflows will literally transform the value
          of media archives and support the development of interdisciplinary research and curricular
          goals (e.g., media literacy) regarding the study of visual culture history and its
          legacies in the 21st century. These goals have grown to be especially timely during the
          publication process of this essay: the conceptual and ethical significance of re-imagining
          our collective purchase on historical imagination has been axiomatic to the
          socio-political demonstrations of both outrage and engagement that are iconic to 2020.
      

        Situating MEP in relation to transnational media archives
        MEP was conceived by Prof. Williams at an early meeting of the ambitious Project Bamboo
          DH initiative. Bamboo is no more, but its basic principles still inform those of MEP: most
          digital tools have been built for the sciences, resulting in a crying need for DH
          resources in the Arts and Humanities. But if every institution assumes it must fulfill all
          recognized needs, our goals will be doomed; we must work collaboratively and in a series
          of progressive arcs forward to develop both traditional and emergent methodologies of DH
          scholarship.
        The more significant early institutional affiliation for MEP was Prof. Williams'
          inaugural presentation to The Association of Moving Image Archivists (AMIA), which
          generated immediate and enduring collaborative synergies. We are poised to realize new
          research trajectories regarding large moving image collections as big
            data, and are developing institutional ties to vast digital collections of
          historical moving image materials. The notion of ecology is central to the project in
          several ways. Those of us who work on media history recognize all too well that the
          materiality of historical media is fated. These historic materials simply will not endure,
          but for the work to preserve and archive them. This work is especially important and
          timely in our contemporary media environment. Most media audiences and publics simply do
          not recognize the dilemma that contemporary archivists face. With the rise of social
          media, many people know that there are thousands of videos posted per hour on sites such
          as YouTube, and do not imagine that moving image culture is deeply imperiled, since it
          seems to be ubiquitous and unquenchable. Such an impression effaces the true condition of
          most historical media, which archivists are vigilantly working to preserve.
        The specific platforms we initially engaged and began to bridge are 1) Mediathread, a
          classroom platform developed at Columbia University, that we helped develop as a research
          platform that supports publication of time-based annotation metadata and integration of
          external controlled vocabularies for tagging; 2) Scalar, a digital publishing platform
          developed at The University of Southern California, expanded to support import of
          time-based annotations and controlled vocabularies for tagging; and 3) Onomy.org, specifically designed for MEP to facilitate
          the collaborative creation and sharing of controlled vocabularies for annotating online
          media files.At Dartmouth we were able to convene an extremely productive symposium
            in May 2013, which brought together representatives from multiple participating archives
            and institutions (http://mediaecology.dartmouth.edu/wp/news/page/2). The symposium was
            successful in producing a series of agreements about the future of the project. One key
            outcome was a unanimous call to develop a metadata server and attendant middleware that
            could help to facilitate and maintain quality metadata produced in relation to archival
            elements. The symposium also generated significant interest outside of Dartmouth in
            addition to the invited members of the archival community. MEP has been significantly
            featured at numerous national and international conferences and symposia ever since.
            This includes multiple conferences of the Association of Moving Image Archivists, ADHO
            Digital Humanities, the Society for Cinema and Media Studies, The Orphans Film
            Symposium, The American Studies Association, EUScreen, the Expanded Semantic Web
            Conference, Open Repositories, and the International Association for Media and
            History. The Media Ecology Project has been developed to sit in between and in
          relation to these platforms and media collections, navigating the import, export, and
          production of metadata across participating archival content that has been engaged by a
          scholar or team of scholars. In this way we can propel capacities for search and discovery
          across these media, and develop capacities to realize new forms of research, scholarship,
          and publication.
        
          MEP Archival screening poster of the 2013 founding symposium at Dartmouth
          
        
        We have enjoyed the participation of multiple renowned archives in several key pilot
          projects essential to honing the developmental vision for MEP.These include a pilot
            in conjunction with the UCLA Film and Television Archive researching a ground-breaking
            public television program In the Life that assayed gay and
            lesbian experience in the U.S.; an inaugural international pilot, researching
            informational and documentary films produced at Films Division in India; and two pilots
            that have matured into advanced NEH-funded grant projects to be detailed later in this
            essay (Paper Print collection at The Library of Congress, and historical newsfilm
            materials across multiple archives). One of the goals in each pilot study is the
          scholarly development of taxonomies or controlled vocabularies that can be deployed
          regarding the assignment of tags and other metadata to specific media content areas. The
          application of these vocabularies will enhance the functional discoverability of archival
          content and augment efforts to produce new forms of digital scholarship.
        MEP archival connections are being built on public standards such as the Open Archive
          Initiative and the W3C Web Annotation format. Use of these widely available standards is
          key to making an ecology of applications that encourage bidirectional communication and
          share information as peers, treating archives as not just a source of raw materials but
          also a consumer of new analysis and scholarship. MEP has received funding from a variety
          of internal sources at Dartmouth CollegePrincipally from The Neukom Institute for
            Computational Science, The Leslie Center for the Humanities, The Dean of the Faculty and
            Associate Deans, Office of Information, Technology, and Consulting, and The Dartmouth
            College Library. The Dean of the Faculty Award to Prof. Williams for Scholarly
            Innovation and Advancement in 2014 contributed a considerable stimulus for The Media
            Ecology Project., which has supported software development and metadata
          generation but also conference travel and stakeholder meetings at Dartmouth.
      

        Tools to Build MEP: Key Early Grants
        In addition to internal support within Dartmouth, Prof. Williams has been fortunate to
          share three significant start-up grants that have been formative to MEP development.
        
          1. NEH Digital Humanities Start-Up Grant: The ACTION Toolbox (with 1st PI Prof.
            Michael Casey at Dartmouth, 2011)
          ACTION (Audio-visual Cinematic Toolbox for Interaction, Organization, and Navigation)
            is an open source platform that supports the computational analysis of film and other
            audiovisual materials. ACTION features extraction and multi-feature pattern analysis and
            machine learning tools. These tools include color features, motion features, structural
            segmentations, audio features, and analyses based on automatic labeling of the data via
            machine learning. ACTION provides a work bench to study such features in combination
            with machine learning methods to yield latent stylistic patterns distributed among films
            and directors.Interest in the use of the ACTION Toolbox was especially marked at
              the Workshop on Computational Methods and Film Style in Potsdam in May, 2018.
            As such, ACTION is a platform for researching new methodologies in the study of film and
            media history.The platform allows such features as access to and analysis of
              low-level frame-by-frame data, automated segmentation and clustering of this data,
              audio analysis for soundtracks, and other content analysis tools. The histogram
              extractor class can be used to analyze streams of images or video files. The histogram
              class steps through movie frames and extracts two kinds of histogram for each frame.
              The first is a histogram of the entire image. The second is a set of sixteen
              histograms, each describing a region of the image evenly arranged in a four-by-four
              non-overlapping grid. Histogram values describe distributions of color values in each
              region on the screen and can be used for analysis of both full-frame and 4-by-4
              subframe grids in L*a*b* colorspace. The Optical Flow class generates analysis data of
              general motion on screen. Optical flow data is extracted using an implementation of
              the Lucas-Kanade algorithm, operating tracked features (corner detector) of monochrome
              image data, tracking salient points of image data across consecutive frames. Feature
              extractor classes allow access to audio frame-rate data including spectral and timbral
              features. In addition to developing the toolkit, we collected metadata for over 200
              films from across the full history of cinema, focusing on a representative
              chronological selection of 22 films by Alfred Hitchcock in relation to works by other
              prominent directors across the cinematic aesthetic spectrum, from mainstream Classical
              Hollywood to Maya Deren, Jean-Luc Godard, Chantal Akerman, and David Lynch.
        
        
          2. NEH Tier 1 Research and Development Grant: Semantic Annotation Tool for The Media
            Ecology Project (with John Bell at Dartmouth, 2015)
          The Semantic Annotation Tool (SAT) is an open-source drop-in module that facilitates
            the creation and sharing of time-based media annotations on the Web by researchers,
            students, and educators. SAT is composed of two parts: first, a jQuery plugin that wraps
            an existing media player to provide an intuitive authoring and presentation environment
            for time-based video annotations; and second, a linked-data-compliant Annotation Server
            that communicates with the plugin to collect and disseminate user-generated comments and
            tags using the W3C Web Annotation specification.
          
            Semantic Annotation Tool graphic
            
          
          The goal of building this system was to create an end-to-end open source video
            annotation workflow that can be used as either an off-the-shelf or customizable solution
            for a wide variety of applications. Potential uses include collaborative close reading
            of video for humanities research, simplified coding of time-based documentation in
            social science studies, enhancing impaired vision accessibility for media clips on web
            sites, and many others.The SAT has been developed in response to feedback from the
              scholars and researchers participating in MEP pilot studies, especially regarding the
              generation of annotation metadata to describe media files. This feedback highlighted
              several shortcomings in existing time-based annotation toolsets, most notably a lack
              of interoperability and a set of divergent interfaces that can be difficult to learn
              or use collaboratively at scale. Development of a drop-in annotation tool like SAT
              that addresses these needs is a natural supplement to MEP's previous work promoting
              interconnected systems, and helps ensure that MEP's research, access, and collection
              development goals can be met.
          As is typical for linked data-compliant systems, annotations created by SAT are
            structured using a combination of multiple, type-specific data standards.The
              Annotation Server and jQuery Annotation Plugin were developed in separate but related
              workflows with the Virtual Environments and Multimodal Interactions (VEMI) Lab at the
              University of Maine. As part of the initial submission for review, VEMI released the
              test version of both server and client components of the SAT. A SAT annotation
            consists of:
          
            A Media URI describing the location (source) of the object being annotated
            Basic identifying metadata for the source object (e.g., title, author) when
              available
            Provenance information for the annotation
            A textual annotation body and multiple tags that apply to the delimited media
              fragment. SAT annotations create relationships between these components and the media
              object being annotated using several standards, including subsets of Friend of a Friend (FOAF), Simple Knowledge Organization System
                (SKOS)
              W3C Open Annotations (OA)
              and Dublin Core (DC).
              Annotations are encoded for transmission using JSON-LD.
          
          Statler is the server half of the Semantic Annotation Tool. Built on a Ruby on Rails
            framework, Statler is a standalone linked data server that allows persistent annotations
            to be added to media files with minimal changes to the host platform. Statler's public
            face is an API that serves W3C Web Annotation11-compliant metadata describing arbitrary
            media URLs.
          Waldorf.js is the client half of the Semantic Annotation Tool. It is a jQuery plugin
            that can be added to any HTML page with only a few lines of code. Once installed it
            searches the page for HTML5 media tags and dynamically wraps them in an interface that
            supports annotation of time-and geometrically-delimited media fragments. Waldorf.js was
            developed in collaboration with VEMI LabThe VEMI Lab at the University of Maine
              researches accessibility and adaptive technology with a focus on blind and low vision
              users. MEP and VEMI collaborated on the development of SAT. They are a primary partner
              in the second advanced NEH grant discussed below. to ensure that accessibility
            was forefront in its development and that playback of annotations is compatible with
            screen reader software.Though the Annotation Server was originally intended to be
              a Hydra/Fedora (renamed Samvera) application, VEMI Lab developers found Hydra/Fedora
              to be difficult to install and maintain. We removed Hydra/Fedora from the SAT software
              stack and replaced it with a simple Ruby on Rails application. Statler implements the
              same W3C Web Annotation-compliant public interfaces that Hydra/Fedora would include,
              but greatly reduces the server overhead necessary to implement the system.
        
        
          3. Expanding SAT via Knight News Challenge: Unlocking Film
              Libraries for Discovery and Search (with Prof. Lorenzo Torresani and John Bell
            at Dartmouth, The Internet Archive, VEMI Lab at UMaine, 2016)
          This 6-month Knight grant successfully demonstrated the potential for the Semantic
            Annotation Tool to help make troves of film/video housed in thousands of libraries
            searchable and discoverable. Working with Dartmouth College's Visual Learning Group
            (directed by Prof. Lorenzo Torresani), we collaborated to apply machine vision tools
            already being developed for object, action, and speech recognition to a collection of
            one hundred educational films held at the Internet Archive.Prof. Williams and a
              colleague at The Internet Archive produced manual time-based annotations that
              subdivided 20 of the 100 films into several sequences of short clips, about 10 seconds
              each. The Machine Vision Search team utilized Google image searches generated from
              manual search terms to partially train a neural network. The software leveraged image
              recognition algorithms to enable content-based search and metadata generation across
              the entire video collection. Once trained, the network was demonstrated to find
              additional short clips of the concepts and tag them in the larger collection.
            The goal was to set the stage for future full-scale integration by examining the output
            of these tools and comparing them to one another as well as to human-generated
            annotations.
          Part of the significance of our project was to enable essential first steps in object
            and action recognition for historical formats of film/video, thereby providing
            incentives for the field of computer vision to develop research capacities regarding
            film/video from prior eras.It was important to develop data specific to the study
              of archival film, because the content of a typical film library is much different than
              the types of video generally used in the development of machine vision software. Most
              of the progress being made in applying this software is delegated to very
              contemporary, hi-definition video formats such as videos taken via new cell
              phones. Typical library cataloguing practices provide only basic information
            for such content: title, subject, synopsis. Libraries have made great strides in
            unlocking word culture texts through optical character recognition; they are opening up
            audio items with voice-to-text transcription. But thus far, libraries have not found
            ways to unlock moving images and annotate them at scale. Developing steps to realize an
            automated solution to producing high-quality metadata about such historical film and
            video content will be critical to allowing libraries and archives of all sizes to make
            the collections they own available for public use. The data generated by this prototype
            grant provided a significant model for first steps toward developing such a system (see
              Figure 4). The deep learning output was not error-free,
            but the success rate outperformed expectations.
          
            Machine Vision Search overview
            
          
          The prototype also demonstrated the utility of The Semantic Annotation Tool as the back
            end of such a research protocol, robust enough to host the entire iterative annotation
            cycle: to enable the creation of manual (curated) time-based annotations by
            knowledgeable scholars and scientists, and to host the subsequent machine-learning
            output of many times more time-based annotations. The fulfillment of the research
            process will allow the content curators (manual annotators) to quickly evaluate the
            machine-learning results, which will produce a new enlarged and sweetened training set
            for the algorithms, etc. The resultant iterative cycle of excellence would indeed
            produce game-changing results for moving image libraries and archives everywhere. The
            ideal interface would operate by translating in real-time the text-queries provided by
            users into content-based classifiers that recognize speech, audio, objects, locations,
            and actions in the video, in order to identify the desired segments in the film. When
            implicitly validated by users (by viewing), the search results and the original text
            queries would be fed into SAT which will add these annotations to each film for
            permanent semantic browsing and search.
          With talented undergraduate students at the DALI Lab at Dartmouth, we were able to
            produce a Machine Vision Search prototype website that illustrates the research process
            and also demonstrate key research results: SAT was used to display tags generated by
            machine vision analysis of films as time-based annotations of those films. MVS
            demonstrates the flexibility of SAT by significantly changing its presentation
            interface, eliminating the annotation bodies and instead displaying only tags. In
            addition, Waldorf.js was extended to add new functions like flagging and deleting
            tags/annotations that the machine vision system identified incorrectly. These new
            functions additionally demonstrated SAT's flexibility, because they required no changes
            to the annotation server itself. Dartmouth students were able to create the custom MVS
            interface on a very short development timeline due to SAT's architecture and
            simplicity.
        
      

        Applications: MEP Advanced NEH Grant Projects
        In 2018 Prof. Williams and Dr. Bell were honored to receive two advancement grants from
          The National Endowment for the Humanities for The Media Ecology Project. These grant
          projects had each been initially developed as demo pilots for MEP and are now poised to
          realize significant advances in Digital Humanities scholarship via further developments of
          SAT, both technologically and conceptually.
        
          1. The Paper Print/Biograph Linked Data Compendium: Understanding Visual Culture
            Through Silent Film Collections (2018-2020)
          One of our inaugural pilot projects was in conjunction with the Library of Congress
            regarding their early silent film era materials, with an emphasis on the historically
            significant Paper Print collection .Our pilot project
              was conducted with the participation of the renowned DOMITOR research society, and
              engaged Prof. Tami Williams (University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee) plus scholars who
              utilized the pilot study materials in their courses on silent cinema, including Prof.
              Frank Kessler (Utrecht University), Prof. Laura Horak (Carleton University), and Prof.
              Amy Lawrence (Dartmouth). The Paper Print collection is, especially in the U.S.
            context, roughly the equivalent of the Rosetta Stone for those who study moving image
            history in relation to visual culture: a vast and inspiring series of historical objects
            that is unique in film history. As motion pictures were invented and experimented with,
            their producers applied for copyright of each film by placing a positive print of the
            film materials on ribbons of photosensitive paper for deposit at the Library of
            Congress. This has resulted in a record of the literal development of early cinema
            practices that no other archive can duplicate. We are extremely proud that the Library
            of Congress has promised to digitize the entire corpus of Paper Print titles in relation
            to the partnership forged by MEP and the esteemed early cinema and pre-cinema study
            organization DOMITOR. Early research in the pilot was represented as the plenary panel
            of the 2017 Women and the Silent Screen conference in Shanghai.
          This recent advanced NEH grant project will produce a digital compendium of over 400
            select films from the silent cinema era documenting the aesthetic practices of early
            cinema, with attention to the transition of visual culture from stage to screen. The
            Compendium will afford many new questions regarding historical visual culture that span
            the extraordinary history of early cinema from attractions to narrative, from the
            natural world to vaudevillian theatrics, from abstraction to realism. It will combine
            highly-influential and rare works archived at the Library of Congress with materials
            preserved at the Eye Filmmuseum in Amsterdam, The British Film Institute (BFI), and The
            Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) to create a digital resource for film scholars around the
            world. Many early films from Eye will be digitized from prints derived from films shot
            in the original Biograph format of 68mm, prints that offer better raw material for
            machine vision analysis than Paper Print versions, for example. Taking an innovative
            approach to annotating the digitized films with diverse types of scholarly description,
            archival metadata, and machine-generated annotation, the compendium will present
            visitors with a variety of analytic lenses embedded in a single, simple interface.
          
            Poster for NEH grant Early Cinema Linked Data Compendium
            
          
          The late Paul Spehr's meticulous chronological production logs of American Mutoscope
            & Biograph films, derived from various historical collections over many decades of
            research, will serve as a backbone for the Compendium to provide a framing
            infrastructure for all of the Compendium films and foreground the 68mm films especially
            as neglected marvels of early cinema, ripe for rediscovery and counter-history. The
            corpus will also feature new digital access to the collection of Biograph exhibitor
            catalogs at The Museum of Modern Art, a resource that features three keyframes from each
            motion picture title described — rich historical information and extremely rare kernels
            of visual culture, in many cases for films that are otherwise considered lost. The
            compendium will frame each film and its historical record as a resource for rediscovery
            and fresh methodological interventions, central to the advancement of the digital
            humanities in relation to visual culture.
          To create the compendium, we will integrate MEP's SAT with software developed by the
            Alliance for Networking Visual Culture (ANVC). ANVC's Scalar is a web publishing
            platform designed to present text, media, and data using integrated, flexible interfaces
            that was an early integration target for MEP when the project built data exchange tools
            connecting it with Mediathread. Integration of SAT into Scalar is an evolution of those
            earlier efforts: rather than attempting to move data between annotation tools that do
            not follow common standards, the new project would take the standards-compliant SAT
            module and drop it directly into the Scalar platform. Both SAT and Scalar are built on
            semantic web principles that make it easy to gather and merge diverse data from across
            the web using linked data, making the integration a natural fit.
          Several types of data will illustrate the compendium's wide range of methods to assess
            and study these valuable works of cultural history (see Figure
              5). These data include:
          
            The films themselves, as streamedStreaming media is used both as a technical
                and legal solution. The Compendium will not need to host large amounts of streaming
                media or worry about intellectual property constraints since the media is already
                publicly available. from the Library of Congress and Eye Filmmuseum
            Basic metadata and select annotations identifying creative personnel and
              genre
            An extensive database of film production information
            Descriptions of performance styles and gestures of some films, encoded using Laban
              Movement Analysis (LMA)
            Algorithmically-generated analysis, such as optical flow visualizations, to
              highlight formal characteristics of some films
          
          The compendium will also serve as an evolving source of information and scholarly
            possibility. Because of its open software framework, interested scholars can contribute
            their own analyses based on interpretative contexts of their own devising. This MEP
            linked data compendium, then, will not only unite a wide and growing variety of data,
            but offer the chance for scholars to gather and trade ideas with one another, creating
            fertile territory both for discussion and the sparking of new knowledge about these
            essential works of cinema. The Compendium will contain data describing many different
            aspects of films in the corpus.
          For example, one key area of emphasis that evolved in the MEP pilot study on the Paper
            Print Collection is the analysis of performance styles. One of the characteristics of
            the era is the transition from heavily codified theatrical performance styles derived
            from late 19th century theater, toward the uneven development of more
              cinematic performance styles that evolved in relation to the
            proximity of the motion picture camera. An ideal case study emerged regarding the career
            of Florence Lawrence who, though uncredited (as were most all performers of the
            pre-Nickelodeon era), came to be known to audiences as The Biograph
              Girl. In this study, primarily developed by Prof. Jenny Oyallon-Koloski,
            time-based clips of Lawrence's onscreen appearances were demarcated via brief
            description and tagged according to a simplified protocol of Laban Movement Analysis
            (LMA). Mediathread provided the capacity to codify her performance style (gestures,
            facial expressions, other aspects of the expressive body) and potentially contrast her
            performance style with those of other Biograph actresses of the era such as Mary
            Pickford.
          In MEP's pilot studies, Mediathread allowed for the documentation of delimited written
            descriptions and metadata relevant to each title among the archival films accessed to
            that point. The annotation of Lawrence's performances, for example, were applied via
            full-frame time-based annotations. Using the Semantic Annotation Tool in the Compendium
            will enhance the precision of our already granular annotation methodology by adding
            geometric targets within a frame and real-time playback of annotations with sub-second
            resolution. These innovations will enable the creation of time-based annotations that
            reference films with greater specificity, a key enhancement given the speed with which
            performance modalities shift.
          Traditional cataloging techniques depend on key concepts like normalizing metadata into
            standardized sets of descriptive fields and ensuring consistent minimum coverage across
            a collection. The Compendium will instead organize annotations produced via networked
            scholarship using linked data concepts drawn from the semantic web. Linked data was
            designed to distribute data across a decentralized network: the entire Internet. Like
            the Internet itself, it was designed for heterogeneity and fault tolerance. Using linked
            data as the basis for research annotations will allow the Compendium to use highly
            specific data models for each type of inquiry that a scholar wishes to pursue, rather
            than try to force data into pre-approved ontologies. Since it contains no expectation of
            complete coverage, researchers can choose to annotate as many or as few films as they
            need for their research–new data simply adds to what is already known about a
              film.In December 2014, the W3C produced its first public working draft of a
              standardized data model for Open Annotations (OA). The model encapsulates text
              comments, tags, and external links as annotations that can be applied to a variety of
              assets embedded in web pages. Critically, it also provides for annotations that apply
              to fragments of assets, such as a geometric selection area within
              a video frame or a timecode-delimited subclip of a media file. Using a standard like
              W3C WA makes new applications for time-based annotations more feasible and available
              to a wider variety of scholars. Linked data concepts, which permit new types of
              structured data and incomplete coverage of a collection, will allow scholars to easily
              create new data facets that are specific enough to support advanced analysis in the
              Compendium. While that functionality had previously been available in proprietary or
              vendor-defined formats, OA is the first time a standards body with the weight of W3C
              endorsed an annotation data model that developers can depend upon for stability and
              interoperability. The OA model has now become part of the broader W3C Web Annotation
              (W3C WA) spec. The linked concept means that disparate
            data types can be connected to one another using either simple relationships–two
            annotations may refer to the same timecode in a video–or semantically rich
            relationships–for example, cause and effect.
          In addition to manual annotations, we are working to apply another type of data in the
            Compendium: optical flow tracking based on computer vision analysis of the
              films.Initial attempts to apply optical flow to Paper Print copies of early
              films have been uneven at best, due to the poor resolution and almost ubiquitous
              appearance of analog noise in the images. We have not yet made
              tests on the early 68mm materials. SAT will allow us to pinpoint where in the
            frame the annotated movement takes place, which will facilitate the isolation of
            gestures and smaller movements and allow us to visualize actors' movement pathways
            through the frame. These improved annotation strategies will strengthen our ability to
            document the movement patterns we are observing, will aid in our communication of these
            findings to research collaborators, and will enhance the complementarity between our
            manual annotations and computer vision analysis.
          The films represented in this Compendium will designate a galaxy of new research
            inquiries, especially when placed into linked data relations with one another and with
            the new textual and contextual metadata we will provide. The Compendium will in a sense
            re-animate early cinema history, phenomenologically and conceptually, especially for
            audiences and users new to this material. Contemporary media theorist Bernard Stiegler's
            preferred phrase is to re-enchant our sense of history and the
            world , a necessary tonic to the information bloat and
            hollow exploitation of much digital media engagement today.
          But we also will cross a new set of thresholds in a digital humanities context,
            critical to this grant opportunity, by re-articulating the dialectic described in the
            very notion of digital humanities. The tension that exists between the traditional
            Humanities tenets of close textual analysis versus the demand for distant reading and
            analysis at scale in the computational sciences will be both visualized and
            progressively informed by this linked data Compendium.For example, research in
              convolutional neural networks theory has suggested research questions informed by what
              is called the two-streams hypothesis: the difference that exists in the human visual
              cortex between two pathways of understanding, between the ventral stream tied to
              object recognition and the dorsal stream tied to the recognition of motion . The use of optical flow visualizations and metadata
            in the Compendium project (previously utilized in the ACTION toolset) will
            hopefully contribute to both the existing data pool of optical flow research and to the
            fundamental experiential distinction between manually-generated granular performance
            annotations and machine-generated cinemetrics. Both types of data will be shown in
            context with one another within the Compendium, inviting new relationships between close
            and distant viewing. Scientists, scholars, and artists alike will be in a position to
            imagine and explore unique ways to further interrogate and mobilize this new experience
            and pursue new research questions and representational innovations.
          Though it will contain several finished essays, the Compendium will also exist as a
            first draft of complex research on these films with a large multi-archive body of films
            and related metadata to be iteratively added. But it will also be an engine for new and
            previously unconsidered research questions and methods, a first draft of varied
            directions of inter-disciplinary DH pursuits that can directly engage the arts,
            historical and cultural studies, and computational analysis.
        
        
          2. The Accessible Civil Rights Heritage Project (2018-2020): Expanding the Goals of
            Access
          Our MEP pilot on historical news materials (newsreels, news telecasts, newsfilm, and
            other associated footage) was dedicated to new scholarship on news materials from
            multiple archives. We gradually honed this topic and its participants into a focused
            address to Civil Rights content,Prof. Williams' introduction to the genre of
                newsfilm was courtesy of his participation for many years in
              The Association of Moving Image Archivists and especially a program about UCLA
              archive's 1970s newsfilm from Los Angeles television station KTLA at the Orphans West
              Coast symposium in 2011. An especially poignant example depicts a 1979 public protest
              by dozens of concerned African-American women at Parker Center in Los Angeles after
              the shooting death by police of Eula Love, a recently widowed 39-year-old
              African-American mother. The killing of Eula Love resulted from a dispute over an
              unpaid gas bill, a tragic landmark in the notorious racialized encounters by the LAPD
              and citizens of color. The protest event captured by the KTLA newsfilm footage
              provides an indelible memorialization of that tragedy. It is not known if any of the
              footage ever aired on television, but the power and salience of the imagery is deeply
              instructive today regarding the value of historical newsfilm. The women collectively
              and elegantly performed a public demonstration of the question Can we speak back to power? For additional analysis of this footage see
                . For an inter-medial relationship of this event to
              the coterminous rise of New Black Cinema in Los Angeles, see . with a double purpose of developing new scholarship plus a dedicated line
            of research and development to enable access of these semantically rich and complex
            materials for blind and visually impaired (BVI) users.
          
            Poster for NEH grant Civil Rights ACRH NEH grant
            
          
          The term newsfilm has evolved in relation to historical changes in
            media technology and media formats. Television newsfilm evolved after decades of motion
            picture newsreel and news magazine production that was intended for exhibition in motion
            picture theaters on a weekly or bi-weekly basis. Local television newsfilm–often shot on
            site by local television station news crews that only broadcast a fraction of what they
            recorded–is a largely untapped source of local and national history that captured
            powerful moments throughout the emotionally and politically charged American civil
            rights era. Television newsfilm was produced in a different media industry context and
            was intended for exhibition to domestic audiences on an almost
            daily basis in the U.S. for many decades. It was regularly produced by both local
            television stations and network television news divisions.
          A key context significant to most television newsfilm collections is local television
            itself, which is a conspicuous, persistently ignored aspect of U.S. media history, even
            though the local station is the backbone and the condition of possibility for the
            dynamics of U.S. network television. Local television history is a common site of
            disavowal regarding many media histories, especially work on U.S. media history. As
            such, it can be the site of significant resultant capacities for historiographic depth
            and complexity. What is often truly compelling about sophisticated historical research
            is the relationship between the already-understood and what we think we know, versus the
            capacity to interrupt given history, perhaps even to intervene in that history. Local
            and network television newsfilm features the full spectrum of these historiographic
            capacities.
          Television newsfilm was a primary form of extended news coverage for roughly forty
            years, from the evolution of television in the 1940s to the gradual adaptation to video
            formats in the 1980s. Much of the footage to be considered for this study is what is
            sometimes termed raw newsfilm, the footage that existed in-camera
            before it was edited and repurposed by the news professionals at a station or network.
              Newsfilm also describes local and network
              finished news stories and news programs and documentaries that
            utilized footage from multiple sources, aired for domestic audiences and sometimes
            distributed via film prints to local, national, and international markets. Collections
            of television newsfilm are being preserved and curated today in many archival
            collections across the U.S. and around the world. Most of these collections are as yet
            unavailable for critical and historical consideration.
          It is important to underscore that historical newsfilm from different eras and
            industrial contexts have become digitized and available for study and time-based
            annotation only very recently. Many of the newsfilm clips and raw footage materials
            engaged for this study will be seen by scholars for the first time. This is a burgeoning
            area for both scholarly and public interest, a site for critical awareness about the
            (mediated) past. Also distinctive to this project is that much of the newsfilm to be
            studied was never screened publicly. That is, in many instances this newsfilm footage
            has never before been part of the public sphere, and thus has never been considered by
            even casual historians in any field. It has existed outside of critical inquiry and
            scholarship that is devoted to social history and media history. From a cultural
            perspective, these are indexical materials that have not yet been in a position to be
            remembered, let alone forgotten.
          The conditionally absented or fugitive aspects of these civil rights materials inspire
            awakenings of the historical imaginary, and we expect this material will become
            especially relevant within our very contemporary 2020 context of global demonstrations
            and calls for social justice in response to the brutal murder of George Floyd and other
            African Americans in the U.S. The Black Lives Matter outcry
            in the weeks and months prior to the publication of this essay has been widespread and
            sustained, and seems to represent what Raymond Williams referred to as a major shift in
              structures of feeling
            : affective relations between consciousness and social
            institutions that are strongly emergent and inflect palpable pressure on commonplace
            rationalizations and actions.
          The historical and historiographic potential of these materials is both vast and
            substantial. The Accessible Civil Rights Heritage (ACRH) project (see Figure 6) will help to expand the discoverability of these
            historical materials for critical consideration, by developing scholarly practices in
            relation to archival practices that will enhance searchable access to these historically
            rich items that would otherwise continue to be isolated in archival and data silos and
            virtually unavailable for search of any kind.
          The hundreds of newsfilm elements made available for study in this project will serve
            as a representative sample of the ocean of television newsfilm collected in archives and
            historical societies across the U.S.Newsfilm content will be selected from
              archives across the United States, including The University of Georgia (local
              television newsfilm plus The Peabody Archives), The Mississippi Department of Archives
              and History, The University of Arkansas Pryor Center, The Wolfson Archive at Miami
              Dade College, The Bay Area Television Archive, Media Burn Archive (Chicago),
              Washington University Archive (St. Louis), The National Museum of African American
              History and Culture (Smithsonian), The MIRC Collection at The University of South
              Carolina, The Minnesota Historical Society, Southern Methodist University, The
              American Archive of Public Broadcasting, The UCLA Film and Television Archive, WGBH,
              The Boston TV News Digital Library, The National Archives, and The Library of
              Congress. Note that archival footage used in the BVI corpus will be drawn from
              publicly available collections. The study of the newsfilm era and subsequent
            eras of news coverage (i.e., post-celluloid eras) will be significantly enabled by the
            development of workflows, protocols, scholarly methods, and augmented
            vocabularies/ontologies to be developed in this proposed study.The team of
              consultants enlisted for this project are renowned experts in media studies and issues
              of racial and ethnic representation. Their varied personal and professional
              backgrounds will help create annotations highlighting the significance of the selected
              corpus of newsfilm and evaluate the value of those annotations to scholarly study.
              Participating scholars include Jacqueline Stewart (U Chicago) and Desirée Garcia
              (Dartmouth). Research into specific adaptive strategies will be led by Nicholas A.
              Giudice and Richard R. Corey of the Virtual Environments and Multimodal Interaction
              Lab (VEMI Lab) at the University of Maine. Technologies used include MEP's tools SAT
              and Onomy, ANVC's Scalar, and the Distant Viewing Lab's Distant Viewing Toolkit (DVT).
              Creating a pathway for DVT's machine-generated annotations to support and inform
              human-generated annotations written in SAT is an important step that extends the
              merged distant-and close-reading methods developed for the machine vision search
              project into more nuanced forms of scholarly commentary and analysis.
          In order to consolidate these diverse materials we have engaged archivist Becca Bender
            (Rhode Island Historical Society) to advise on the creation of a common metadata
            spreadsheet format, and veteran professional moving image cataloguers Kathy Christensen
            and Laura Treat to help develop an Onomy vocabulary specific to the purpose of
            annotating civil rights news footage. These new cataloging and access procedures will
            assist in the parallel development of innovating high-quality, meaningful experiences of
            the collection to BVI users.
          Given the special concerns of close textual analysis and its importance to humanities
            researchers, it is critical that any toolset designed to support humanities research be
            developed with that specific application in mind. However, any existing collection of
            materials and scholarship would carry with it the limitations of the tools that were
            originally used to create it–vocabulary and metadata that was designed to fit into a
            particular schema, as discussed by Owens .
          For the purposes of ACRH research, annotations featuring close reading analysis of
            civil rights newsfilm will be merged with extant metadata from the contributing archives
            and scholarly essays that feature newly-generated time-based descriptions. The result
            will be a re-animation of sorts for these historical media documents where specific
            events and images are contextualized in relation to known descriptors and vocabularies.
            ACRH's research into articulating the hermeneutics of moving images using annotations
            will result in a synthetic process that engages archivists, scholars and students to
            share their experience of these key cultural heritage texts with others–even those who
            cannot see the original texts.
          ACRH will repurpose a selection of assorted newsfilm to produce a corpus of material
            that is uniquely challenging to describe: historically charged footage laden with
            contextual meaning but limited extant metadata. This sub-corpus is being repurposed for
            research into adaptive technology for BVI users, a fundamental example of
            cross-disciplinary opportunities that MEP is designed to enable and investigate.
            Although the potential historical value of newsfilm materials for BVI access is evident,
            accessible delivery of online video is a challenge that higher education has struggled
            to meet, leading to thousands of hours of video instruction being taken offline because
            the schools that created it could not provide equal access to all users.
          The state of BVI accessibility on the web is, in short, disastrous. Web browsers in
            general are riddled with inconsistent implementations of reference specifications and
            vendor-exclusive features. Adding accessibility features that are often poorly
            understood and costly to implement to that unstable environment has resulted in–at
            best–inconsistent efforts to ensure web content meets accessibility guidelines, e.g.
              . The type of content that ACRH is targeting, online
            videos with time-based annotations, is so new that accessibility has not yet been
            thoroughly considered in this context. By researching key guidelines and technologies,
            ACRH has an opportunity to direct the accessibility conversation about time-based
            annotations in positive directions.
          As the online market has matured, the penalties for organizations that fail to make
            content accessible online have grown. In 2015 the Department of Justice settled with
            online education giant EdX for failure to comply with the Americans with Disabilities
            Act and forced EdX to implement a number of accessibility standards including WCAG 2.0
            and WAI-ARIA.https://www.justice.gov/usao-ma/pr/united-states-reaches-settlement-provider-massive-open-online-coursesmake-its-content
            UC Berkeley decided to remove thousands of hours of open educational audio and video
            content because it did not have the resources needed to make it ADA compliant,https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2017/03/06/u-california-berkeley-delete-publicly-available-educationalcontent
            touching off a heated back and forth between university administrators and
                faculty.https://ucbdisabilityrights.org/2016/09/22/faculty-response-to-koshland/
            Accessibility problems are not limited to higher education either, as in the case of a
            2014 lawsuit brought against Seattle School District 1 that resulted in a consent decree
            that was estimated to cost the district in the range of three-quarters of a million
                dollars.https://marketbrief.edweek.org/marketplace-k-12/edtech
          
          BVI students in particular may have trouble fully understanding primary video sources
            because the text or audio descriptions associated with them rarely convey the full
            meaning and context of the images on screen. BVI users cannot see content filled with
            small clues that may be critical to its interpretation. Humanities scholars pore over
            information-dense resources like video to closely read it as a primary historic text at
            a level of detail that goes far beyond the ability of traditional accessibility
            adaptations like captioning to capture. ACRH proposes that time-based annotation
              techniquesFor the purposes of ACRH, an annotation consists of a reference to a
              specific time and geometric region of a video, a textual body describing the content
              in that region, a set of tags associated with the textual body, and additional
              provenance metadata as needed to attribute an annotation to an author. can
            provide support for humanistic interpretation of video far better than existing adaptive
            technology. Beyond the BVI community, though, researching best practices for time-based
            annotation will provide scholars with a new perspective on how to integrate data-centric
            digital heuristics with deeply cultural hermeneutics.
          Existing accessibility guidelines for online video usually focus on creating secondary
            audio or caption tracks that synchronize playback with the video itself.Increasing
              accessibility also improves the experience for other users . The closest these recommendations come to SAT's methodology is
            Mozilla/A11y's recommendation to embed a timed text track into Ogg video. Setting aside the
            browser restrictions introduced by using Ogg video, timed captions have a number of
            drawbacks in an educational setting when compared to full annotations: they are only
            delimited by time, not geometric space in the frame; they do not carry additional
            metadata like tags that are useful for cataloging and search; and they do not include
            authorship information that is important to convey in a scholarly context. Additionally,
            SAT's separation of annotation data from the video file provides opportunities to
            readily query that data using external tools–a key feature that streamlines the workflow
            of digital humanities scholars.WebVTT is also worth mentioning in this context, but it has limitations
              similar to A11y's Ogg recommendation except the data is not stored within the Ogg
              container file.
          ACRH will study how to write video annotations that convey the rich content of
            evocative videos, and create adaptive technology that supports playing back those
            annotations audibly. The resulting guidelines and technology will be published as an
            open resource that all schools, museums, and archives can use to make their own video
            collections more accessible to BVI users. The grant brings together scholars,
            archivists, cataloging experts, and cognitive neuroscientists to research best practices
            for these requirements. The result will be an evidence-based set of guidelines for
            creating accessible video annotations, documentation on how to implement those
            guidelines using open-source software, and a demonstration corpus of civil rights
            newsfilm showing humanities scholars how to apply these guidelines to their own
            research. Just as there is a concept of resources that are
              born-digital, ACRH proposes to build a humanities corpus that
            includes video, annotation, and metadata so it is, as a body,
              born-accessible.
          Composing annotations of moving image culture that are meant to assist blind and low
            vision viewers redefines certain basic assumptions about visual culture among the
            sighted, and demands careful attention to details otherwise taken for granted. It is
            surprisingly difficult to capture the basic information of a shot. Our methods are
            experimental, in that we are near the completion of compiling a sufficiently large data
            set to provide our colleagues at VEMI for their qualitative social science research.
          The participating archives have generously provided core descriptive metadata for
            hundreds of civil rights newsfilm clips, and assisted in selecting the dozens of clips
            for which we will provide more extensive time-based annotations via SAT. The
            methodology, process, and culminating metadata will be published and made available for
            open access and use. Much of the archival media will also be available for scholarly and
            public access from the participating archives, dependent upon archival protocols and
            online capacities.
          A culminating symposium for the ACRH Project will bring together archivists,
            technicians, and especially scholars from across academic disciplines to critically
            engage and assess the results of the project and imagine next best steps to develop the
            ARCH Project research materials.In light of the present pandemic conditions, the
              symposium is likely to be virtual and online.
        
      

        Visual Culture DH: Reflections on the Way(s) Ahead
        As the article has shown, MEP has a history of supporting projects exploring
          intersections between different methodologies of study and critical approaches to varied
          archival content. We have found time-based annotations and tags to be a key enabling
          technology that allows scholars the freedom to engage with digital media texts from
          multiple perspectives that can then be programmatically synthesized into a cohesive
          assemblage.
        Among the methodological comfort zones to be negotiated in Digital Humanities, we are
          committed to the development of Visual Culture Studies in DH, which can produce tension
          with legacy approaches to DH that primarily focus on word culture alone. In addition, the
          field of Film and Media Studies often features attention to research methods that address
          and engage audiences and the reception of media texts, emphases that are less prominent in
          the historical study of word culture. Most important is the prominent DH tension between
          the traditions of close reading that are central to the Arts and
          Humanities versus the goals and practices of reading at scale that are crucial to
          computational approaches to vast corpora of texts under analysis. Taylor Arnold and Lauren
          Tilton revise the terminology regarding visual culture to distant
            viewing, which takes into account the implicit interpretive quality of acts
          of viewing .
        Recognizing sites of potential dissonance can help to reformulate them as sites of new
          inquiry and critical intervention in the pursuit of Visual Culture Studies, to produce
          instead a growth area for both productive research inquiry and rigorous critical
          evaluation. The close and distant reading/viewing dissonance of DH can be seen to work
          within the motivated, intentional bi-play of manual and automated annotations in MEP as a
          defining and iterative dialectic which allows us to better recognize an always-already
          evolving spiral of creative and critical exchange across manual and automated realms.
          Realizing a full awareness of this dynamic model may present a fundamental perspective
          toward progress in the emerging interdisciplinary space that is DH.
        One signal theoretical turn to recommend in this realization of an ongoing and dynamic
          dialectic toward computer vision and machine-reading excellence is the historic approach
          to early cinema theory provided by Dziga Vertov's Kino-Eye or kinoglaz
            theory.Vertov's films have been a point of primary focus and inspiration for
            landmark books about digital humanities methods such as 
            . The emphasis here is on the historiographic
            significance of Vertov's theory, especially as it may be applied to contemporary and
            emergent issues regarding computer vision and machine learning (AI). Vertov's
          theory famously consists of two major tenets, related yet distinct from one another. In
          tenet one, kino-eye is engaged with his great enthusiasm and devoted
          pursuit of new technologies of enhanced vision (e.g., the motion picture camera and
          related lens technologies), which represented material advances beyond human vision alone
          that seemed capable of both futurist and constructivist goals for enhancing society and
          culture. But equally if not more important is the second major tenet,
            kino-edit, which requires the rigorous study and understanding of
          the world and its historical processes by the artist/scientist, in order to actively
          interrogate, differentiate, and recontextualize what may be recognized to be merely
          positivist technological outputs of the Kino-Eye (e.g., racial and gender bias in facial
          recognition software, etc.) 
          
          
          .
        Vertov's theory is widely recognized in its motivated call for critical and aesthetic
          discernment and socio-political insight. Like many aspects of visual culture
          historiography, it is surprisingly applicable to not only early cinema but also to the
          rise of digital culture and its related epistemologies. We can anticipate that the
          development of new DH tools and platforms for Visual Culture Studies will necessitate
          sophisticated theoretical frameworks that will prove essential to 21st research and
          scholarship. The two tenets/steps of Kino-Eye theory are directly applicable to the MEP
          advanced NEH grants described above, especially in relation to the iterative workflows of
          manual close-textual annotations, vast machine-reading expansions in the number of those
          annotations, and manual curated evaluations of the machine-reading results (that then
          afford a new training set for another iteration of the cycle). Also significant to
          recognize is that these annotations are sometimes frame grabs, but primarily time-based
          sub-clips, the study of which can judiciously contribute to a new and contemporary
          re-understanding and elaboration of Vertov's elusive, unfolding, yet core concept of the
          moving image interval, tied to the organization and elaboration of
          movement .
        There is more to say about the conceptual and phenomenological value of manual time-based
          annotations. As suggested earlier, manual annotation of visual culture is a contemplative,
          iterative, and essential task that mirrors more innovative annotation practices across
          Digital Humanities endeavors. For example, annotation platforms such as hypothes.is have
          inspired new scholarship that promotes the generative aspects of close reading practices
          in relation to networked scholarship when annotating word culture texts in their platform
            
          
          .
        Indeed, part of the spirit of intervention within MEP and SAT is the process of manual
          annotation itself, which necessarily slows down the apprehension and understanding of
          moving images as aesthetically expressive media. This produces a palpable countervailing
          force against many contemporary viewing practices of moving image culture. For example,
          professors and other teachers of media history and arts can attest almost uniformly to a
          gradual change across generations of their students in the craft of
            reading moving image culture beyond a stencil or scaffold of
          factual and narrative content.
        For media historians and artists, this mode of reception can seem as though many
          audiences today have been trained as pattern recognition filters, impatient for the next
          plainly evident delta change of attractions in the image or soundtrack, and fundamentally
          inattentive to basic aesthetic information provided as signal contributions to the
          expressive registers of the text. This results in an implicit or even explicit audience
            demand or drive to accelerate perceptual stimuli (I've got it, move on; I've got it, move on…) that eschews many of
          the fundamental temporal and spatial registers of visual culture, and moving images in
          particular.
        This presumptive need for speed may be directly related to changing ecologies in the
          expansive amount of available quality mediated content, but also inter-medial changes in
          the patterns of consumption of time-based media (e.g., scrubbing through video,
          binge-watching); emergent formal practices within games and social media; and perhaps even
          a resultant competitive pressure for the use of one's time within and across mediascapes,
          e.g. . Even though these contemporary reading practices and
          competencies may ultimately prove to be valuable in specific contexts,Robert Samuels
            articulates a strategic refusal to denounce generational differences via the
            construction of a hyper-binary about media consumption . there is indisputable value in also learning to deepen one's capacity for
          better attending to the historical aesthetic practices in moving image craft and art
          (across the full range of expressivity), and also to better understand the value of such
          an investment.Anecdotally, students participating in the creation of ACRH
            annotations for use in BVI research report that this work has clearly enhanced their
            appreciation of and capacity to read for visual culture aesthetics. The rise of
          the global slow cinema movement is a key index of truly widespread
          cultural resistance to accelerated media culture, and exists in part as a contemplative
          critical response to the aesthetics and underlying political economy of mediated
          subjectivity based upon expediency, speed, presentism, and the exploitation of a delimited
          attention economy, e.g. .
        A broader but related perspective regarding digital culture writ large, and perhaps
          especially the debated value of the rise of artificial intelligence (machine-reading),
          comes from the technological imperatives derived by Bernard Stiegler , who has been developing a series of incisive theoretical
          tropes concerning the rise of digital culture as a pharmakon: at once a powerful and
          enticing possible remedy for specific needs and demands in a socio-political system, but
          also a poison if used unknowingly or improperly.
        Stiegler's most important intervention regarding DH resulted from his career-changing
          participation in the artist-scientist collaborative Ars Industrialis in 2005, which led to
          his committed politics of critique that makes a concerted call to
            re-enchant the world via new and rigorous attention to history and
          the arts, imbued with critical literacy about them. Central to his increasingly complex
          and refined theories is a renewed attention to the significance of what he terms tertiary
          memory (e.g., the archive), an externalized and technical extension of internal
            memory, plus a call to return to an intentional and motivated anamnesis, a
          refusal to forget the vital importance of critical engagement with these memory deposits
          in the interest of sustainable cultural environments. He positions this essential work of
          critical engagement in relation to what Plato termed self-care, but
          jettisons Plato's dismissal of the technological. Contemporary society, deeply imbued by
          technology and mediation, is now, perhaps for this very reason, threatened to become
          history-less and therefore uncritical about itself as a control Society 
          
          .Stiegler passed away suddenly on August 5, 2020. See
              https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/aug/18/bernard-stiegler-obituary.
          Conscientious and motivated engagement with the archive is an essential component of
          balancing and even responding to the pharmakon of drives and controls associated with
          accelerated digital culture and AI. The call for both a renewed ethic of self-care about
          societal memory and a rigorous set of practices that enable such motivated and critical
          engagements are directly parallel with the goals and practices of MEP.
        One purposeful area of related debate in the contemporary moving image archive world
          circulates around the recent proliferation of high-definition video
            upgrades (4K, 60fps) achieved via deep learning methods and often applied to
          early silent film era footage, see e.g Denis Shiryaev's
            youtube channel and Simon (2020). Passions can run high when archivists rightly
          insist that these media entities are separate and derivative objects:
          not archival acts of preservation or restoration, not grounded in meticulous curatorial
          insights and not dedicated to the indexical materiality of historical photo-chemical film
          prints. But there may be potential to realize a Stieglerian teachable moment in relation
          to these experiments that push the capacities of digital tools in
          order to change the experience and affect of watching historical
            cinema texts. Wide interest about these materials in online
          communities may indeed represent a re-enchantment of public imagination regarding early
          cinema, a literal sense of re-newed awareness and interest about history and moving
          images--and therefore an opportunity for archivists and scholars to direct attention
          toward an assortment of knowledges about early cinema (including the essential work to
          preserve and respect its history). In other words, the drive
          (compulsion?) within sectors of the AI industry to transform historical media artifacts
          into dramatically enhanced localized forms of attractions is itself
          an overdetermined project regarding desire for/within the historical imagination that is
          worthy of much further consideration. Without immediately casting aspersions on these
          considerable technological efforts, the experiential enthusiasm they inspire in audiences
          might be recognized as a digital framework to build upon. If the
            upgrade aesthetic dynamics border on a potential for mere spectacle
          of the hyper-real,See  for background about the
            inter-medial history of electronic culture, and historiographic details about uneven
            development toward capacities (and demand) for a digitally mediated subjunctive
              now in practices of representation. this potential may
          represent a techno-cultural pharmakon that is ripe to be more fully understood and
          historically grounded. How best to channel the many implicit investments in history of the
          visual arts embedded in these twin dynamics of digital production and reception, to engage
          these investments and further develop them in edified and conceptually insightful
          contexts? There is a compelling relationship to the MEP Early Cinema NEH grant, in that
          the great anticipation within the archival community to experience screenings of the newly
          restored 68mm films shot with the Biograph camera during the earliest years of cinema
          (restored at 4K and 8K at the BFI and the Eye Filmmuseum) offer a substantial
          counter-example to deep-learning video upgrade productions, and may
          set the table for dialectical Stieglerian discourse called for hereIn August, 2020,
            the online release of a significant 68mm film restored by The
            Museum of Modern Art led to viral social media enthusiasm among the archival and film
            fan communities: The Flying Train (1902)
          .
      

        Conclusion: Emerging Contexts for MEP
        The time for this critical engagement has never been more necessary and opportune. The
          moving image archive world is keenly engaged in efforts to delineate and address the
          imperiled status of their collections . Access to archival
          content is becoming more foregrounded as a goal of preservation,The Eye Filmmuseum
            hosts an online channel devoted to their restoration efforts: Restoration at Eye.
          and as Giovanna Fossati points out in her standard-setting book From Grain to Pixel: The
          Archival Life of Film in Transition, DH is gaining momentum as scholars work to bridge the
          gap between digital methods, film and media studies, and media archives .
        
          MEP mind map: 2019 overview of the project
          
        
        The connections of MEP to existing trends in DH research are evident (see Figure 7). Formal stylometric analysis grounded in new
          capacities for annotation are emerging in several international centers of DH study , and are conversant with the fragmentation aesthetics of many
          artists working with large media corpora
        We have already contributed to the conversation about artists engaging with archival
          content initiated by our colleagues at the Eye Filmmuseum: The Sensory Moving Image
          Archive (SEMIA). We anticipate and welcome opportunities to build bridges toward, for
          example, the WJAN BOT at The Eye and also
          Brian Foo's Moving Images video project . At the same time we are inspired by and look forward to
          collaborating with more traditional filmmakers who work primarily with archival
            footageRecent films include Dawson City: Frozen Time (Morrison, 2016), Apollo 11
            (Miller, 2019) and Recorder: The Marion Stokes Project (Wolf, 2019). For more on this
            tradition see ., and also more directly cinephilic
          endeavors such as scholar artists involved with the burgeoning Video Essay component of
          Film and Media Studies .
        The analytic, annotation, and presentation tools engaged to work with audiovisual
          materials in DH are themselves becoming more collaborative. MEP is a member of the Video
          Annotation Interoperability (VAINT) group
          that includes the makers of such tools as the CLARIAH Web Annotation tool, ELAN,
          Frametrail, and VIAN. While each of these tools was developed for a specific purpose,
          their core data all indexes back to time-based annotations. VAINT is developing a standard
          that will allow the tools to exchange data so scholars can, for example, directly export
          results from VIAN's color analysis tools into SAT and present them alongside textual
          commentary using SAT's integration with Scalar. Also currently under consideration by the
          group is a further integration with IIIF-AV, which would open up data exchange with the
          large set of IIIF-compliant presentation tools. This approach of common data exchange,
          rather than consolidating functions into a single tool, is a match for MEP's philosophy
          that tools addressing specific intellectual concerns can be put into conversation with one
          another to support synthetic, interdisciplinary scholarship. A related new
            pedagogical project utilizing SAT has been initiated at Dartmouth: enhancing the use
            value of archival motion pictures by utilizing them in basic language instruction. This
            project was inspired by the innovative teaching methods of Prof. Hua-Yuan Mowry at
            Dartmouth, who uses graphics and motion pictures in her classes to teach Mandarin. The
            pilot for this project uses SAT to illustrate written language as it is spoken in a
            famous Chinese animated short, Three Monks by Jingd Xu (1980). The SAT interface
              plays in real time several sequential annotations of transcribed
            Mandarin characters at the same time that the associated Mandarin words are spoken in
            the film. This basic SAT schema could enhance instruction across many languages and
            potentially even dynamically toggle or alternate subtitle languages as students watch
            foreign language films.
        Prof. Williams and Dr. Bell have been invited to participate in a working group of the
          FIAF (International Federation of Film Archives) Cataloguing and Documentation Committee
          Task Force dedicated to Linked Open Data, in order to further investigate the sharing of
          FIAF Glossary of Filmographic Terms in an RDF structure. A related area of development is
          an endeavor to initiate a multi-lingual dictionary of film terms.In response to a
            generous bequest by the Taiwan Film Institute Archive, who gifted to Prof. Williams
            their unique and considerable bi-lingual dictionary of film terms (English and
            Mandarin), the Dartmouth Library worked with MEP to OCR and transcribe this resource in
            order to make it available as an Onomy spreadsheet. The work to achieve this complex
            final spreadsheet (that features three varieties of Mandarin script) was completed by
            gifted Dartmouth student Janine Sun. This has inspired the internal funding of several
            more undergraduates at Dartmouth to help develop additional bilingual Onomy spreadsheets
            that will contribute to a larger multi-lingual dictionary goal. We have initiated
          work with the American Film Institute and the Women Film Pioneers Project to expand the
          recognition of women filmmakers in digital and online resources. Very recently MEP has
          been funded to work with the Distant Viewing team on developing a prototype digital
          resource at Dartmouth regarding the prestigious James Nachtwey collection of photographic
          journalism.
        In continuing to realize a virtuous cycle of engagement with media art and history, we
          will work collaboratively and intentionally to be poised toward a spirit of critical
          inquiry that is engaged with innovative work at other academic and cultural institutions
          around the world. Our efforts to engage via DH more access to and scholarship about visual
          culture and moving image history presents innovative approaches to fundamental
          historiographic questions about media and history, and also address the danger of further
          losses to that history in both practical and theoretical terms. We intend the scholarship
          that we conduct and inspire to avoid a gloss of mere positivism in its pursuit of new
          research questions, and to invoke issues of the missing, the fragmentary, the occluded,
          the repressed, and the fugitive regarding this history.
      
