Title:  Digital Surrealism: Visualizing Walt Disney Animation
                    Studios
Volume:  011
Issue:  1
Date:  29 November 2016
Abstract:  
                
                There are a number of fruitful digital humanities approaches to cinema and media
                    studies, but most of them only pursue traditional forms of scholarship by
                    extracting a single variable from the audiovisual text that is already legible
                    to scholars. As an alternative, cinema and media studies should pursue a
                    mostly-ignored digital surrealism that uses computer-based methods to
                    transform film texts in radical ways not previously possible. This article
                    describes one such method using the z-projection function of the scientific
                    image analysis software ImageJ to sum film frames in order to create new
                    composite images. Working with the fifty-five feature-length films from Walt
                    Disney Animation Studios, I describe how this method allows for a unique
                    understanding of a film corpus not otherwise available to cinema and media
                    studies scholars.
            
Full Body Text: 
There are quite a number of fruitful digital humanities approaches to cinema and
                media studies, which vary widely from aesthetic techniques of visualizing color and
                form within shots to data-driven metrics approaches analyzing editing patterns.
                Despite their methodological differences, what all these approaches have in common
                is the reduction of the complex film or television text — image, sound, editing,
                production history, reception, paratext — to a more limited set of manageable
                variables: color palette, scripted dialogue, average shot length, budgets, box
                office results, or social media presence. While any digital humanities project
                requires the reduction of a complex set of textual elements to a smaller set of
                abstracted variables, cinema and media studies poses a special challenge to the
                digital humanist since film and television objects are composed of disparate
                elements that are as challenging to reconcile as they are to pull apart. That is, it
                is relatively easy to separate an image from its soundtrack and then do something
                like time the length of shots, but such a method obscures for the digital humanist
                the otherwise intractable complexities of film and television texts. While projects
                that perform textual analysis of a set of screenplays, or that map the relationships
                between actors and industrial figures, or that compare cutting rates across time
                periods all acknowledge the limitations of their approaches, they nonetheless
                reinforce the sense of film and television as a dis-integrated medium whose
                constituent parts can be analyzed discretely.
Before readers imagine that I have discovered a solution to this difficult problem, I
                admit that the film studies work which I describe here is subject to the same
                criticism, for the same reason I began with: that the digital humanist must make an
                initial decision about which components to abstract and represent, and in doing so
                must by necessity omit others. There is not yet something like a principal
                    components analysisMatthew Jockers defines principal components
                    analysis, or PCA, as 
                        a method of condensing multiple
                            features into ‘principal components,’ components that represent,
                            somewhat closely, but not perfectly, the amount of variance in the
                            data
                        
                    . For literary analysis, this means that the multi-dimensional variance
                    between a large set of variables (such as word count, noun frequency, number of
                    semicolons, named locations, year of publication, or whatever other variables
                    the researcher has extracted) within a corpus of texts can be plotted in only
                    two dimensions. for the media text which can account for the inherent
                diversity of the physical object. But rather than only pursue digital forms of
                traditional methods that are already legible to the cinema and media studies scholar
                (like projects that simply use computers to more efficiently analyze screenplays or
                editing patterns or industrial business histories),For example, Yuri Tsivian
                    and Gunars Civjans’s excellent and often-discussed website Cinemetrics
                    http://www.cinemetrics.lv offers a
                    digital method for calculating shot lengths; while this software approach is
                    certainly much faster than calculating by hand, it is not specifically something
                    that requires a computer, and thus it fits in a different class of digital
                    projects from those that cannot be done (albeit slowly) by hand. what I
                propose instead is something weirder. To borrow from Stephen Ramsay’s call for a 
                    hermeneutics of screwing
                        around,
                    
                 I propose a digital humanities project that is more aleatory and aesthetic
                than it is formal and constrained. This fits within the framework of deformative
                    criticism, which has emerged as an innovative site of critical practice
                within media studies and digital humanities, revealing new insights into media texts
                by breaking them in controlled or chaotic ways. Deformance includes a wide
                range of digital experiments that generate heretical and non-normative readings of
                media texts; because the results of these experiments are impossible to know in
                advance, they shift the boundaries of critical scholarship . Thus, deformative criticism offers a crucial venue for
                defining not only contemporary scholarly practice, but also media studies’ growing
                relationship to digital humanities. So, rather than reduce the film or television
                text to one of a well-established list of components such as the shot or the
                cut or the soundtrack in order to extract individual elements, how might we
                abstract the film or television text so that it is presented to us in a radically
                new way? How can we transform the object of study into something which retains the
                organic features of the original, but which is freed from the burdening
                over-recognition of form? How can we create something from cinema which is familiar
                but unrecognizable? 
Here, I describe my method and theory for creating and interpreting summed frame
                    z-projections of films. In this process, I compress the visual field of a
                film into a single image in order to compare a corpus of summed frames and create
                new avenues of scholarly research. I call this technique digital surrealism,
                since it creates images by means of an automatic process which reveals otherwise
                unconscious information about film texts. While the resulting images on their own
                are aesthetically pleasing, a comparative analysis of a corpus of summed images can
                generate new analytical modes for digital humanists who work with image analysis,
                raising new, comparative, second-order questions that come out of this
                digitally-aided abstraction.

                A summed z-projection of Sleeping Beauty, dir. Clyde
                    Geronimi, 1959
                
            

                Texts
                I took for my corpus the fifty-five animated feature films produced between 1937
                    and 2016 by what is now known as Walt Disney Animation Studios.Walt Disney
                        Animation Studios was formed as Disney Brothers Cartoon Studios before being
                        called Walt Disney Productions and then Walt Disney Feature Animation. It
                        was named Walt Disney Animation Studios in 2006 after Disney bought Pixar
                        Animation Studios. These include well-known, wildly successful
                        classics such as the first feature-length cel animation Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, Disney’s first
                    original story The Lion King, and Disney’s most
                    successful film Frozen, as well as relatively
                    unexamined films like the Latin American compilation Saludos Amigos, the commercial and critical failure of The Black Cauldron, and Disney’s first full
                    computer-animation Chicken Little. One might expect
                    digital manipulations of animated films to look different from live-action
                    films, but I was surprised that my digital surrealist research strategy revealed
                    very little difference between these two modes of narrative cinema. I have done
                    similar research on a corpus of fifty-four live-action films from the western
                    genre (1993–2007), forty-two gialli (1956–2013), and the twenty-six Japanese
                        Zatoichi films (1962–89), and observed
                    remarkably similar tendencies to those I found in the Disney corpus . The fifty-five Disney films offer a particularly
                    rich corpus for digital surrealist investigation: despite the often rocky
                    history of the studio’s management, Disney is and has been the most important,
                    innovative animation studio ever, releasing a film on average every seventeen
                    months over the last eight decades and pioneering many significant,
                    groundbreaking, and influential animation techniques like fully synchronized
                    sound, three-strip Technicolor, the multiplane camera, multi-channel sound,
                    CinemaScope, and numerous software engineering techniques. As a part of the
                    larger Walt Disney Company media conglomerate (after Comcast, Disney is the
                    second largest media conglomerate in the world by revenue), Walt Disney
                    Animation Studios also plays a significant role in a global marketing juggernaut
                    that continues to shape both multinational industrial media practices and the
                    proliferation of American cultural exports. Indeed, as early as 1934, Walt
                    Disney worked with the United States government to promote cultural exchange
                    with Latin America through feature animation and 
                        by 1943, 94 percent of all the
                            footage produced by the Disney Studio was done under government
                            contract
                        
                    . We can thus reasonably expect the corpus of Walt Disney Animation
                    Studios to represent both a broad range of historical innovation in animation as
                    well as a consistent, calculated, family-oriented production strategy.
                
                    The Walt Disney Animation Studios corpus
                    
                        
                        Film
                        Year
                        Directed by
                    
                    
                        1
                        Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs
                        1937
                        Larry Morey, David Hand, Wilfred Jackson, Ben Sharpsteen, Perce
                            Pearce, William Cottrell
                    
                    
                        2
                        Pinocchio
                        1940
                        Ben Sharpsteen, Hamilton Luske, Bill Roberts, Norman Ferguson, Jack
                            Kinney, Wilfred Jackson, T. Hee
                    
                    
                        3
                        Fantasia
                        1940
                        Norm Ferguson, James Algar, Samuel Armstrong, Ford Beebe Jr., Jim
                            Handley, T. Hee, Wilfred Jackson, Hamilton Luske, Bill Roberts, Paul
                            Satterfield, Ben Sharpsteen
                    
                    
                        4
                        Dumbo
                        1941
                        Ben Sharpsteen, Norm Ferguson, Wilfred Jackson, Bill Roberts, Jack
                            Kinney, Samuel Armstrong
                    
                    
                        5
                        Bambi
                        1942
                        David Hand, James Algar, Bill Roberts, Norman Wright, Samuel
                            Armstrong, Paul Satterfield, Graham Heid
                    
                    
                        6
                        Saludos Amigos
                        1943
                        Norm Ferguson, Wilfred Jackson, Jack Kinney, Hamilton Luske, Bill
                            Roberts
                    
                    
                        7
                        The Three Caballeros
                        1945
                        Norm Ferguson, Clyde Geronimi, Jack Kinney, Bill Roberts, Harold
                            Young
                    
                    
                        8
                        Make Mine Music
                        1946
                        Jack Kinney, Clyde Geronimi, Hamilton Luske, Joshua Meador, Robert
                            Cormack
                    
                    
                        9
                        Fun and Fancy Free
                        1947
                        Jack Kinney, Bill Roberts, Hamilton Luske
                    
                    
                        10
                        Melody Time
                        1948
                        Clyde Geronimi, Wilfred Jackson, Hamilton Luske, Jack Kinney
                    
                    
                        11
                        The Adventures of Ichabod and Mr.
                            Toad
                        1948
                        Jack Kinney, Clyde Geronimi, James Algar
                    
                    
                        12
                        Cinderella
                        1950
                        Wilfred Jackson, Hamilton Luske, Clyde Geronimi
                    
                    
                        13
                        Alice in Wonderland
                        1951
                        Clyde Geronimi, Hamilton Luske, Wilfred Jackson
                    
                    
                        14
                        Peter Pan
                        1953
                        Hamilton Luske, Clyde Geronimi, Wilfred Jackson
                    
                    
                        15
                        Lady and the Tramp
                        1955
                        Hamilton Luske, Clyde Geronimi, Wilfred Jackson
                    
                    
                        16
                        Sleeping Beauty
                        1959
                        Clyde Geronimi
                    
                    
                        17
                        One Hundred and One Dalmatians
                        1961
                        Wolfgang Reitherman, Hamilton Luske, Clyde Geronimi
                    
                    
                        18
                        The Sword in the Stone
                        1963
                        Wolfgang Reitherman
                    
                    
                        19
                        The Jungle Book
                        1967
                        Wolfgang Reitherman
                    
                    
                        20
                        The Aristocats
                        1970
                        Wolfgang Reitherman
                    
                    
                        21
                        Robin Hood
                        1973
                        Wolfgang Reitherman
                    
                    
                        22
                        The Many Adventures of Winnie the
                            Pooh
                        1977
                        Wolfgang Reitherman, John Lounsbery
                    
                    
                        23
                        The Rescuers
                        1977
                        Wolfgang Reitherman, John Lounsbery, Art Stevens
                    
                    
                        24
                        The Fox and the Hound
                        1981
                        Art Stevens, Ted Berman, Richard Rich
                    
                    
                        25
                        The Black Cauldron
                        1985
                        Ted Berman, Richard Rich
                    
                    
                        26
                        The Great Mouse Detective
                        1986
                        Ron Clements, John Musker, David Michener, Burny Mattinson
                    
                    
                        27
                        Oliver & Company
                        1988
                        George Scribner
                    
                    
                        28
                        The Little Mermaid
                        1989
                        Ron Clements, John Musker
                    
                    
                        29
                        The Rescuers Down Under
                        1990
                        Hendel Butoy, Mike Gabriel
                    
                    
                        30
                        Beauty and the Beast
                        1991
                        Gary Trousdale, Kirk Wise
                    
                    
                        31
                        Aladdin
                        1992
                        Ron Clements, John Musker
                    
                    
                        32
                        The Lion King
                        1994
                        Roger Allers, Rob Minkoff
                    
                    
                        33
                        Pocahontas
                        1995
                        Mike Gabriel, Eric Goldberg
                    
                    
                        34
                        The Hunchback of Notre Dame
                        1996
                        Gary Trousdale, Kirk Wise
                    
                    
                        35
                        Hercules
                        1997
                        Ron Clements, John Musker
                    
                    
                        36
                        Mulan
                        1998
                        Barry Cook, Tony Bancroft
                    
                    
                        37
                        Tarzan
                        1999
                        Chris Buck, Kevin Lima
                    
                    
                        38
                        Fantasia 2000
                        1999
                        James Algar, Gaëtan Brizzi, Paul Brizzi, Hendel Butoy, Francis Glebas,
                            Eric Goldberg, Don Hahn, Pixote Hunt
                    
                    
                        39
                        Dinosaur
                        2000
                        Ralph Zondag, Eric Leighton
                    
                    
                        40
                        The Emperor's New Groove
                        2000
                        Mark Dindal
                    
                    
                        41
                        Atlantis: The Lost Empire
                        2001
                        Gary Trousdale, Kirk Wise
                    
                    
                        42
                        Lilo & Stitch
                        2002
                        Chris Sanders, Dean DeBlois
                    
                    
                        43
                        Treasure Planet
                        2002
                        Ron Clements, John Musker
                    
                    
                        44
                        Brother Bear
                        2003
                        Aaron Blaise, Robert Walker
                    
                    
                        45
                        Home on the Range
                        2004
                        Will Finn, John Sanford
                    
                    
                        46
                        Chicken Little
                        2005
                        Mark Dindal
                    
                    
                        47
                        Meet the Robinsons
                        2007
                        Stephen J. Anderson
                    
                    
                        48
                        Bolt
                        2008
                        Chris Williams, Byron Howard
                    
                    
                        49
                        The Princess and the Frog
                        2009
                        Ron Clements, John Musker
                    
                    
                        50
                        Tangled
                        2010
                        Nathan Greno, Byron Howard
                    
                    
                        51
                        Winnie the Pooh
                        2011
                        Stephen J. Anderson, Don Hall
                    
                    
                        52
                        Wreck-It Ralph
                        2012
                        Rich Moore, Phil Johnston, Jim Reardon
                    
                    
                        53
                        Frozen
                        2013
                        Chris Buck, Jennifer Lee
                    
                    
                        54
                        Big Hero 6
                        2014
                        Don Hall, Chris Williams
                    
                    
                        55
                        Zootopia
                        2016
                        Byron Howard, Rich Moore, Jared Bush
                    
                
            

                Method
                Inspired by Lev Manovich’s Software Studies Initiative, I use as my primary tool
                    ImageJ, a public domain scientific image analysis software program developed by
                    the National Institute of Health that works with an increasing library of
                    user-created plugins. ImageJ can process a variety of image types, facilitating
                    simple tasks like scaling, rotation, and contrast adjustments as well as much
                    more highly technical operations such as morphological data mining,
                    trabecular geometry and whole bone
                        shape analysis, and 
                        comparison of intensity ratios
                            between nuclei and cytoplasm
                        
                    . ImageJ is customizable with any number of plugins and macros, and like
                    other advanced image processing programs such as Photoshop, even its basic menu
                    can be bewildering. For the purpose of analyzing moving images, ImageJ’s most
                    useful functions are found in its Stacks menu; stacks are multiple spatially or temporally related
                        images, called slices, that are displayed in a single window . Imagine neatly cutting out each frame
                    from a brief filmstrip and stacking them up in sequential order so that you are
                    left with a three-dimensional volume. In effect, ImageJ does this digitally, but
                    it can also analyze each slice as it relates to the entire stack: 
                        in stacks, a pixel (which
                            represents 2D image data in a bitmap image) becomes a voxel (volumetric
                            pixel), i.e., an intensity value on a regular grid in a three
                            dimensional space
                        
                    . That is, with stacks, ImageJ can not only analyze the two dimensions of
                    an individual film frame, but can also analyze any slice or line through the
                    third dimension of the stacked film frames. One typical application of ImageJ is
                    with spatially related images, like those produced by confocal microscopy, where
                    a complete in-focus image of an object is built up from a stack of partially
                    in-focus slices, or for various forms of medical tomography like PET or CAT
                    scans, where successive scans of slices of the interior of the body are stacked
                    to model a hidden structure. In these examples, it is desirable for the captured
                    object to remain as still as possible to get an accurate rendering. So, applying
                    these methods to large stacks of temporally related but spatially unrelated film
                    slices, which not only have moving objects but also numerous scene transitions
                    and framings, leads to unpredictable results. In effect, we are converting the
                    dimension of time that we experience while watching a two-dimensional motion
                    picture into a third spatial dimension that can also be analyzed.I
                        demonstrate this further in .
                

                
                    Visualizing a stack of slices as a cube in ImageJ
                    
                


                To create a stack in ImageJ, users can import in a number of ways: a video file,
                    an animated gif, or an image sequence. Due to processor memory limitations, most
                    users will find the simplest strategy is to create a folder of stills to
                    import; I use Quicktime Player 7’s Export feature, selecting the option movie
                        to image sequence to generate a folder of sequential jpegs. For this
                    project, I created image sequences at 0.5 frames per second, or one frame every
                    two seconds.Users have an option to set the number of frames per second to
                        export; experimentation shows that 24 frames per second is overkill and that
                        acceptable results can be found with settings as low as 0.10 frames per
                        second. For a 90-minute film, this results in an evenly-distributed
                    sampling of 2,700 frames. I removed errant black frames from the beginning and
                    end of the stack as well as distributor and production logos that were later
                    added for home video release (but kept production or studio logos that are
                    integrated into the opening or closing credits). For example, here is a
                    chronological montage of the 2,832 frames generated for Frozen.

                
                    Montage of 2,832 evenly-distributed frames from Frozen
                    
                



                Once these slices are imported into ImageJ as a stack, there are any number of
                    manipulations users can perform on a film. Here I describe only one — summed
                    z-projections — which achieve my digital surrealist aim of transforming the film
                    text into a new object of research. This process visualizes films in ways that
                    were otherwise impossible for humans through most of the last century, capturing
                    the extreme boundaries of the moving image and collapsing all of the frames into
                    a single space. ImageJ offers six z-projection methods for creating a flattened,
                    two-dimensional image from the three-dimensional stack: average intensity,
                    maximum intensity, minimum intensity, sum slices, standard deviation, and
                    median. Each projection type works by performing a different mathematical
                    operation on the RGB (red, green, blue) values of each voxel in the image,
                    examining the same pixel location for every slice in a stack.The code for
                        the z-projection is available here: http://imagej.nih.gov/ij/source/ij/plugin/ZProjector.java
                    Thus, Minimum and Maximum Intensity simply print the darkest or brightest pixel
                    for each coordinate, while Average and Median Intensity print the pixel color
                    somewhere in the middle and Standard Deviation a new pixel representing,
                    obviously, the standard deviation of all the pixels along a particular
                    coordinate. The one I am most interested in is Sum Slices, which adds together
                    the voxel space of the stack of slices, compressing the film’s visual field to
                    reveal a single representative image. Below is a simple demonstration of the six
                    operations on a small twenty-frame stack.

                
                    Twenty sample frames from a sequence in Snow
                            White
                    
                

                
                    the six z-projection methods in ImageJ used on the Snow White sequence
                    
                

                
                    The six z-projection methods in ImageJ used on the entire film Snow White
                    
                

            

                What is a Sum?
                What does it mean to sum a film, to add it up? Cinema is excessive:
                    there is too much, either along the diachronic or synchronic axes, for viewers
                    to be able to process the moving image without recourse to a science like
                    mathematics or an art like theory. While most audiences and reviewers would not
                    think specifically of math while watching a narrative film (outside of box
                    office results), mathematical metaphors abound in discussions of film. For
                    instance, contemporary reviews often sum up movies, resulting in an image
                    of cinema as having unlike component parts that need to be added together in
                    order to make sense: the acting was good, the dialogue worse, the soundtrack
                    better. An informal search of the film critic Roger Ebert’s website (http://www.rogerebert.com/) finds
                    seventy-four uses of the phrase doesn’t add up to describe the failures
                    of movies under review. Even the director Sergei Eisenstein, in famously
                    explaining how hieroglyphics inform his theory of montage, resorts to math: 
                        the point is that [the
                            combination] of two hieroglyphs of the simplest series is to be regarded
                            not as their sum, but as their product
                        
                    . Rejecting simple addition for complex multiplication, for Eisenstein
                    cinema comes partly from the world of numbers: shots proportioned, framings
                    balanced (or not), and all aspects directly measurable, as in his well-known
                    audiovisual notation of a scene from his film Alexander
                        Nevsky (1938).

                
                    Sergei Eisenstein’s audiovisual notation of Alexander
                            Nevsky
                    
                


                While my summed images erase montage and the possibility of two specific images
                    colliding to produce a third dialectical meaning, they do democratize the film’s
                    images in a way that is impossible to imagine while watching, collapsing with a
                    grander equation the important and unimportant, the major and minor, the dark
                    and bright. In these images, all that is left is the trace of the filmmaker’s
                    intentions; even a master like Eisenstein is unable to direct the viewer’s
                    attention to anything other than the sum of everything photographed, intentional
                    or accidental. While collapsing the film text to a single frame might initially
                    strike some as overly reductive, this process magnifies a cinematic experience
                    that is otherwise entirely unnoticeable: the pure, cumulative effect of duration
                    on our eyes and brains without the distraction of narrative or image.
                    Photographer Hiroshi Sugimoto, known for Theaters,
                    a series of long-exposure photographs of movie theaters lit only by the light
                    reflected off the screen, is also interested in trying to capture the time of a
                    whole film in a single image. Conceptually my work is similar to his, but his
                    process results in black-and-white images with luminous, blank screens, whereas
                    mine reveal color, shading, and depth. Last, I point to artists Jason Salavon
                    and Jim Campbell, who independently worked with statistical processes and
                    averaging in the late 1990s and 2000s on collections of yearbook photos, Playboy centerfolds, Dutch paintings, novel pages, and
                    films. My use of digital surrealism as a media studies research strategy is thus
                    is conversation with an artistic tradition of visual analysis of groups of
                    images.


                
                    Hiroshi Sugimoto’s long-exposure photographs of movies projected in
                        theaters
                    
                


                Here are the fifty-five sums of Walt Disney animation I created. For the sake of
                    visual comparison, I have scaled all of these images to the Academy aspect ratio
                    of 1.375:1, although obviously the films were initially released in a variety of
                    aspect ratios.Aspect ratios were 1.37:1 from 1937–1953, then two films at
                        2.55:1, 1.75:1 from 1960–1981, one film at 2.20:1, 1.85:1 from 1986 to 2000,
                        then a variety of ratios between 1.75:1 and 2.39:1 from 2002–present.
                        Further complicating matters, home video releases quite often adopted a
                        different aspect ratio from the theatrical presentations, usually following
                        trends at the time. They are presented in chronological order from
                    upper left to lower right in eleven rows of five columns, and for the sake of
                    reference I have included the film’s number along with the title here and in the
                    text below (thus, 21 Robin Hood can readily be
                    found at the beginning of row five). The images are labeled here, but for
                    individual high resolution images without captions see https://www.flickr.com/photos/a2050/albums/72157661482387425.


                
                    Summed z-projections of the fifty-five feature films of Walt Disney
                        Animation Studios scaled to Academy Ratio
                    
                


                At first glance, these images seem remarkably similar, despite being produced in
                    a wide range of styles, techniques, and years. As a form of scholarship or
                    criticism, then, we would begin simply by comparing and contrasting our
                    transformed films, articulating the final effect and questioning what
                    differences in production might have resulted in the subtle differences in the
                    final result. Thus, glancing at the corpus, one aspect readers will likely
                    notice immediately is the strong symmetry of these images. The majority of them
                    feature a lighter, horizontally central shape on a differently-hued background
                    with a varying degree of darker shaded vignetting in the corners. For example,
                    22 The Many Adventures of Winnie the Pooh has a
                    very recognizably Pooh-shaped blob smack in the center of a sky blue background
                    and darkened corners and bottom. Likewise, 14 Peter
                        Pan has a glowing off-white central shape that falls off into blue
                    hues on the left and brown ones on the right, with strong vignetting in the
                    corners and along the top of the image. Forty-three Treasure Island shows a very distinct yellow central shape
                    surrounded by deep blue with darker magenta in the lower corners. But of the
                    symmetrical center shapes, 13 Alice in Wonderland
                    is the most remarkable: rather than the triangular pale blobbiness of the
                    others, the central shape here indistinctly shows both Alice’s straw hair and
                    faint blue dress below.

                
                    Summed frame z-projection of Alice in
                            Wonderland
                    
                


                This becomes even more pronounced when increasing the contrast and saturation of
                    the image, but it is also evident in the numerous medium shots of Alice from the
                    film, which show how often she is isolated on a dark background.

                
                    Individual frames from Alice in Wonderland
                        showing Alice in medium shot
                    
                


                Thus, contrasting this summed frame with the edge-to-edge evenness of something
                    like 36 Mulan, one initial possibility is to use
                    summed frames to gain information about framing choices or emphasis on specific
                    characters. For example, we could conclude that Alice in
                        Wonderland is the Disney film that most consistently frames the
                    titular character, and that it does so to an unusual degree compared to the
                    other films (and to almost all of the other non-Disney films I have analyzed).
                    This is not something that viewers could have intuited across the entire corpus,
                    while this digital surreal method visually quantifies that information for us. 


                
                    Summed frame z-projection of Fantasia
                    
                


                For example, while not as legible as Alice, 03 Fantasia
                    also has a more clearly-defined central shape than the other summed
                    frames. But here, the sharper definition of the shape is obviously due to the
                    repeated shots of the Master of Ceremonies Deems Taylor and the conductor
                    Leopold Stokowski, either of Taylor directly addressing the audience or
                    Stokowski with his back turned preparing to lead the orchestra.


                
                    Individual frames from Fantasia showing the
                        conductor and MC’s repeated presence
                    
                

                This is an unusual exception to the norm for these summed images, whose shapes
                    are oval at best but often simply indiscernible. Fascinatingly, one other film
                    also serves as an exception to the blobby central trend: 53 Frozen has two faint central shapes rather than only one.


                
                    Summed frame z-projection of Frozen
                    
                

                While clearly one of Disney’s Princess Pantheon films featuring a central
                    female protagonist, Frozen visually breaks with the
                    others by using a preponderance of two-shots motivated by the fact that it
                    revolves around the relationship between two orphaned sisters, a queen and a
                    princess. While other Disney films have used wider aspect ratios, Frozen’s rather wide 2.24:1 aspect ratio easily allows
                    for shots where both protagonists are framed in closeup. This is also true of
                    two-shots among other groupings of characters.

                
                    Numerous two-shots in Frozen are evident in the
                        summed frame z-projection
                    
                

                While in some respects this is an effect of Disney’s ability to know that today
                    they would be able to successfully release a home video in widescreen format and
                    not have to crop it as with widescreen films in the earlier days of hated
                    letterboxing and square televisions, it is also evidence of Frozen’s strategy to visualize interactions between characters
                    without relying on over-the-shoulder shots or needing to centrally frame
                    speaking characters. In this way, the summed z-projection technique can quickly
                    allow for larger intuitive comparisons of how films position main characters on
                    screen, whether emphasizing single characters, duos, or groups. In the case of
                        Frozen, we see clear evidence of an unusual
                    (for Disney) choice to frame two characters in closeup for extended periods of
                    time.
                The other noticeable similarity among many of these summed frames is vignetting,
                    a darkening of the periphery of an image caused by insufficient
                        light.Sharp rectangular shapes, such as in 44 Brother Bear or 45 Home on the
                            Range, are caused by the film’s narrative-driven shift of aspect
                        ratio (this edge boxing is also visible in 01 Snow
                            White, whose home video release slightly shifts aspect ratios
                        after the opening credits). Vignetting is most pronounced in 14
                        Peter Pan, 28 The Little
                        Mermaid, 29 Beauty and the Beast, and
                    49 The Princess and the Frog. Compare those four
                    images to 10 Melody Time, 33 Pocahontas, 35 Hercules, or 36 Mulan, which all have a central shape but a background
                    that runs seamlessly to the edges without significant darkening. I attribute
                    this difference both to the conventional wisdom of the cinematic dominant, that
                    moviegoers’ attention can be drawn to the most important subject by making it
                    the best lit, and that the four unvignetted films take place primarily outdoors,
                    while those with vignettes occur inside or in darker, secluded locations. Pocahontas and Hercules
                    are nearly identical in this respect, and their sky-blue backgrounds are
                    obviously evident in the summed frame, compared to the relatively shadowed and
                    clouded undersea kingdom of The Little Mermaid or
                    the forest and castle interiors of Beauty and the
                        Beast. Vignetting is traditionally considered a problem in
                    photography, with the ideal photograph showing a consistent range of tones all
                    the way to the edge. Obviously, animated films need not suffer from this optical
                    problem, and so many of the images that display strong vignetting do so
                    intentionally in an attempt to imitate a vignetted historical look or to
                    illustrate how a scene is artificially lit and to direct the spectator’s
                    attention to the privileged center of the frame. An example from The Princess and the Frog shows this common strategy,
                    where the central characters in this shot are brightly lit while the background
                    dancers and setting are increasingly (and unrealistically) darker as we move to
                    the edges.

                
                    Summed frame z-projection of The Princess and the
                            Frog
                    
                

                
                    Artificial vignetting is clear in many shots from The
                            Princess and the Frog
                    
                

                While vignetting is also apparent in summed frames of live-action films,
                    particularly those not shot primarily on evenly-lit studio sets, animated films
                    that feature vignetting even more consciously perform this photographic flaw for
                    aesthetic reasons. Comparing the degree and type of vignetting in summed frames
                    can offer insight into both the lighting style of live-action films and the
                    imitation of real-world lighting in animated films. While there might be set
                    photographs or lighting notes for live-action films, clues about overall
                    lighting strategies in cel-animated films must be deduced from methods like
                    digital image analysis.
                Looking at the vignetted symmetry of so many of these images, 08 Make Mine Music stands out as an anomaly: is the dark
                    gradient on the right side of the frame an example of something unusual about
                    the film’s visual strategy, or is it just an error in transferring the film
                    print to a home video release?

                
                    Summed frame z-projection of Make Mine
                        Music
                    
                

                This image does not display vignetting, nor does it display a prominent central
                    shape or even a symmetrical background: the image is unbalanced with a
                    predominance of magenta hues on the left side and greenish ones on the right.
                    Looking at the constituent frames, it appears that there is indeed a slight
                    visible darkening error covering the right side of the digital copy, but that
                    there are also frames like Figure 20 that are noticeably intentionally darker on
                    the right.

                
                    Individual frames from Make Mine Music that
                        show a darkening error on the right side
                    
                

                
                    Individual frames from Make Mine Music  that
                        show intentional darkness on the right
                    
                

                While much of the film features its characters in symmetrically centered
                    compositions, the animation emphasizes vibrant gradient backgrounds, established
                    in the title credits, that places characters in long shot on flat, brightly
                    colored, and changing backgrounds. Thus, compared to the rest of the corpus, the
                        Make Mine Music summed frame stands out due to
                    its gradient color shift. Readers familiar with the film will also point to the
                    fact that it is an anthology film composed of ten segments visualizing the
                    interplay between animation and classical and popular music (Debussy, Prokofiev,
                    Donizetti, Benny Goodman, The Andrews Sisters). Thus, the greater variety of
                    animation styles, characters, and settings clearly shows up in the rich mottled
                    image. Using the summed z-projection technique can easily reveal outlier films,
                    those that depart for different reasons from maintaining a dominant,
                    conventional style.


                
                    The bright, gradient title credits of Make Mine
                            Music
                    
                


                Scanning the other summed frames for similarly mottled images, readers might
                    mistakenly assume that 34 The Hunchback of Notre
                        Dame is also an anthology film since its summed z-projection
                    likewise has an unusually uneven composition and unbalanced colors.

                
                    Summed frame z-projection of The Hunchback of Notre
                            Dame
                    
                

                Much of the film takes place at night and there are numerous frames where the
                    right side of the image is indeed completely black, so we can rule out a film
                    transfer error. Many sequences take place in candlelight and there is a
                    climactic fiery battle (as well as the orange and brown credits), so the warm
                    red tones make sense, but what of the green dominating the left?


                
                    Individual frames from The Hunchback of Notre
                            Dame show intentionally dark illustration on the right
                    
                


                
                    The warm-toned credits of The Hunchback of Notre
                            Dame affect the summed frame
                    
                


                I think there is a rather intuitive explanation that our digital surrealist
                    method confirms: throughout the film, Quasimodo wears a drab green tunic, and
                    since he himself is asymmetrical, with a hump on his right side, his
                    characteristic features are best portrayed when he occupies the left of the
                    frame facing frame right (see Figure 25).


                
                    A specific and repeated framing of Quasimodo is clearly evident in the
                        summed frame z-projection
                    
                

                Closer investigation of the film’s slices shows asymmetry is a visual theme
                    throughout — for instance, Esmerelda wears only one hoop earring in her left ear
                    with a hair scarf dangling on the right and a thicket of bracelets on her left
                    arm offset by a lone bracelet on her right wrist — and the summed image supports
                    this strikingly by showing how often Quasimodo’s back and hump occupies the left
                    third of the frame, even as his face is centered. While we would expect
                    anthology films unintentionally to appear unbalanced given the varying range of
                    source material, we can see clearly in the summed image from The Hunchback of Notre Dame how carefully the
                    animators worked to create a dominant visual asymmetry for framing Quasimodo and
                    how this is a wholly unique strategy in the Disney corpus. Since Disney’s
                    typical visual strategy is almost entirely conservative, framing characters
                    centrally or following the rule of thirds, we can see just how unique The Hunchback of Notre Dame is visually, crowding its
                    protagonist’s unruly body to the side. In this way, inspecting the summed frames
                    and accounting for unexpected details allows researchers to pursue new questions
                    from empirical evidence or visually confirm an intuitive hunch.
                Another common shape is apparent in many but not all of these images: the horizon
                    or ground line. It is most visible, for example, in 05 Bambi, 22 The Many Adventures of Winnie the
                        Pooh, 43 Treasure Planet, 45Home on the Range, and 51 Winnie
                        the Pooh, although readers will see faint examples in other films.
                    Of these, Bambi’s darkened lower portion is the
                    most pronounced, especially contrasted with the brightness of the center of the
                    image and the lack of vignetting in the two upper corners.

                
                    Summed frame z-projection of Bambi
                    
                

                The dark lower portion in this film is not due to vignetting or lighting effects,
                    but mainly because the film has more long shots of characters that include the
                    forest floor than it has medium or closeup shots of characters that do not show
                    the ground. This makes some sense for a film like Bambi, focused on placing a young character in his woodland
                    environment and detailing his interactions with smaller, ground-dwelling forest
                    creatures. And yet, the forest floor in Bambi is
                    not particularly black, and the film often captures a downward-looking
                    perspective so that the forest floor occupies much of the frame, not just the
                    bottom ribbon.


                
                    Individual frames that show Bambi’s
                        downward-looking gaze
                    
                

                Closer investigation better explains the dark bottom portion: the animators often
                    occluded the foreground of the frame with brush, tree limbs, or other natural
                    objects (see Figure 28).


                
                    Individual frames of Bambi show how
                        frequently animators obscured the bottom of the frame
                    
                

                This is not only an excellent strategy to the problem of creating a perceived
                    sense of depth in flat animation (so that including specific foreground shapes
                    sets off the central characters from other visual planes), but it also generates
                    a voyeuristic effect to make it seem as if viewers are peering through
                    underbrush to watch Bambi’s life unfold. With this example, we can readily see
                    that the spectator’s psychological distance from the non-human protagonist is
                    encoded in the summed image, again offering a way to produce empirical visual
                    evidence to support an intuitive argument.
                A similar strategy is at work in another film focusing on non-human forest
                    characters, 22 The Many Adventures of Winnie the
                        Pooh.

                
                    Summed frame z-projection of The Many Adventures of
                            Winnie the Pooh
                    
                


                The animation here is much flatter, but as with 05 Bambi, the animators create many downward-facing shots and include
                    darker objects in the foreground of the frame to provide spatial depth cues.


                
                    Individual frames from The Many Adventures of Winnie
                            the Pooh with darker objects at the bottom of the frame
                    
                

                Disney’s second Pooh movie, 51 Winnie the Pooh,
                    offers an interesting comparison since both films are about the same characters
                    and animated in a very similar way.


                
                    Summed frame z-projection of Winnie the
                        Pooh
                    
                


                Here, however, there is a noticeable thick, darker ground line about a third from
                    the bottom of the image, obscured by the central blob shape. It’s difficult to
                    see why Winnie the Pooh’s summed image looks so
                    different from The Many Adventures of Winnie the
                        Pooh, but I speculate that Winnie the
                        Pooh has more shots that are level, revealing more of the sky and
                    making the forest less wooded, and that its foreground objects are not darkened
                    so that the overall image is evenly bright (see Figure 32. 


                
                    Individual frames from Winnie the Pooh do not
                        show the ground or dark objects as frequently
                    
                

                The retro-future 43 Treasure Planet has a much more
                    dazzling, dense, and vibrant animation style that appears in the summed
                    image.

                
                    Summed frame z-projection of Treasure
                        Planet
                    
                

                But here I think we see less of a horizon line and more evidence of the fact that
                    much of the film takes place on a horizonless spectacular flying ship and that
                    our novice hero is often shown against the brown wood of the gunwale with blue
                    sky in upper two-thirds (see Figure 34).


                
                    A individual frame of Treasure Planet with
                        dominant blue sky
                    
                


                The defining blue sky is also apparent in 45 Home on the
                        Range, which has a much different kind of horizon line, defined less
                    by the foreground and more by the skyline. Home on the
                        Range is a western, evoking the Monument Valley locations of John
                    Ford’s films, and we can clearly see how often the three cow heroines are drawn
                    in bright exterior shots.

                
                    Summed frame z-projection of Home on the
                            Range
                    
                

                
                    Individual frames of Home on the Range show
                        grand, outdoor, western-inspired framings
                    
                


                
                    Home on the Range most resembles 32 The Lion King in that the dominant presence of the
                    blue sky clearly defines the film’s majestic outdoor location. Both of these
                    films’ images are remarkably similar to a summed image that I produced for an
                    initial exploration of this project using a corpus of fifty western films: John
                    Ford’s The Searchers (1956) .

                
                    The summed frame z-projection of The
                            Searchers closely resembles Home on the
                            Range
                    
                


                Many of the Disney films feature blue hues, but only a handful like Home on the Range and The Lion
                        King contrast the blue sky with a different-hued lower two-thirds
                    (for example, consider how 33 Pocahontas and 35
                        Hercules are almost all blue). In doing so, we
                    can see how much less defined the central shape is in these, instead showing how
                    the characters in films set in grand exterior locations disappear into their
                    surroundings or are balanced with numerous extreme long shots. 
                Fifty-one Winnie the Pooh, mentioned above (Figure
                    31), also brings us to the final noticeable shape to discuss in these summed
                    frames: textual elements that remain on the screen and burn their way
                    into the summed image. Winnie the Pooh illustrates
                    the first version of this: in the lower right quadrant we can make out the
                    letters ooh left the conte, which
                    indeed turn up in eleven of the slices used (0.59% of the total frames).

                
                    Individual frames in Winnie the Pooh
                        demonstrate the film’s play with text
                    
                

                While much more indeterminate, we can also barely make out nondescript characters
                    in the center of 23 The Rescuers and 21 Robin Hood. These two films do not have as much
                    meta-textual play with writing as Winnie the Pooh,
                    but what they do have in common is that they illustrate the second way that text
                    appears in the summed images, namely, as title or closing credits. In the case
                    of The Rescuers and Robin
                        Hood, the fashion at the time was to list production credits at the
                    beginning of the film rather than the end, and so the credits remain on the
                    screen long enough to be amplified in the summed image; for instance, in the
                    case of The Rescuers, the phrase With the voice talents of remains for 16
                    slices (0.72% of summed frames) while the cast list changes. Interestingly, a
                    film with the same credit sequence strategy, 20 The
                        Aristocats, does not visibly display text in the summed image,
                    perhaps because the text is in black but on a darker background and thus less
                    distinct (see Figure 39). 

                
                    Sample images of the credits for four Disney films
                    
                

                In 51 Winnie the Pooh we also see a second way that
                    production credits affect the summed image, where a very long list of names
                    scrolls continually over either a static or moving background. Winnie the Pooh has well over 400 names listed in its
                    closing credits in addition to song credits and other information; textual
                    credits appear on 246 of the 1859 frames I generated, or a little more than 13%
                    of the film. This shows up in the summed image as two varying width columns
                    starkly separated by a thin stripe.


                
                    Sample frame from Winnie the Pooh’s closing
                        credits showing the negative space that appears in the summed frame
                    
                

                This effect is noticeable as early as 28 The Little
                        Mermaid, and has become more pronounced as credits become longer (I
                    calculate the closing credits occupy 5.26% of The Little
                        Mermaid versus 9.63% of Disney’s recent film 54 Big Hero 6).Over the last two decades, the length of closing
                        credits has remained about the same, and so the varying percentages are a
                        function of shorter or longer running times.
                
                Like many, 51 Winnie the Pooh’s credits take place
                    over a moving and constantly varying background, but readers will no doubt be
                    able to identify the fewer films with extensive credits that scroll over a
                    relatively unchanging background. The most obvious of these are 25 The Black Cauldron, 37 Tarzan, and 54 Big Hero 6. In each of
                    these, a particularly prominent shape is evident: The Black
                        Cauldron’s manuscript borders, Tarzan’s
                    tropical rainforest leaves, or Big Hero 6’s
                    floating dirigibles.


                
                    End credits from three Disney films that play over a repeated image
                    
                

                Twenty-six The Great Mouse Detective has a slightly
                    fainter but still visible image, since it adopts the common strategy of
                    beginning the closing credits over a scenic establishing shot before switching
                    to a black background to display secondary credits.

                
                    A frame from the end credits of The Great Mouse
                            Detective plays over an establishing shot
                    
                

                Careful readers might also wonder about 47 Meet the
                        Robinsons, which appears to have a window-shaped square in the upper
                    right quadrant; however, we discover the credits are a scroll over a solid black
                    background.

                
                    Summed frame z-projection from Meet the
                            Robinsons
                    
                

                In this unusual case, investigation reveals that the window shape is from a scene
                    early in the film, with a shot of our inventor hero inventing.

                
                    One scene from Meet the Robinsons clearly
                        appears in the summed frame z-projection
                    
                

                In this scene, there is one cutaway, and then we return to the same camera setup
                    for a total of 39 slices or 1.4% of the film’s length. Further experimentation
                    is required, but this figure gives some suggestion that there is a threshold for
                    particular objects to appear in static shots and that the placement and
                    brightness of those objects is important (for instance, other unmoving aspects
                    of the shot such as the wallpaper or framed diplomas are not as prominent). Is
                    this then the longest camera setup in the Disney corpus? Or just the
                    brightest?
                While aesthetically I find the summed images more attractive without the closing
                    credits, they are a striking reminder of how much longer the narrative film’s
                    paratext has become due to the greater number of credited contributors. I also
                    find something compelling about the strong central vertical line in images like
                    46 Chicken Little and 53 Frozen, which call to mind Abstract Expressionist painter Barnett
                    Newman’s zip paintings.


                
                    Barnett Newman’s zip painting Onement, I
                        (1948) http://www.moma.org/collection/object.php?object_id=79601
                    
                


                In a 1970 interview with filmmaker Emile de Antonio, Newman describes his zips as
                    a way to unite the parts of his painting and, in a phrase relevant to cinema,
                    speculates on his thought process in creating them: 
                        I suppose I thought of them as
                            streaks of light
                        
                    . Mark Rothko, another well-known Abstract Expressionist painter whose
                    work these summed images call to mind, also describes his paintings as having 
                        their own inner light and if
                            there is too much light [in the museum], the color in the picture is
                            washed out and a distortion of their look occurs
                        
                    .


                
                    Mark Rothko's color field painting Untitled
                        (1968) http://www.moma.org/collection/object.php?object_id=37042
                    
                


                Art critic Clement Greenberg championed Rothko’s work as part of a color field tradition, which used
                    uninflected color to collapse traditional differences between figure and ground.
                    The summed images I produced achieve in related ways this effect, but are built
                    out of some of the most figural images available. I think the summed
                    z-projections evoke the tradition of Rothko and Newman’s work with color, but on
                    another version of a similar project, Kevin Oleary pointed out to me how similar
                    these summed images are to an earlier tradition — the paintings of English
                    Romanticist J. M. W. Turner, such as his later work Venice
                        with the Salute (c.1840-5) or Landscape
                    (c.1840–c.1845).

                
                    J. M. W. Turner’s Venice with the Salute
                        http://www.bbc.co.uk/arts/yourpaintings/paintings/venice-with-the-salute-202458
                    
                


                
                    J. M. W. Turner’s Landscape
                        http://www.bbc.co.uk/arts/yourpaintings/paintings/landscape-97520
                    
                



                So far I have focused on the shapes of these images, but with Turner and the
                    Color Field painters in mind I want to turn to a brief analysis of the color of
                    these images. Below are two simple graphs of all the summed frames created using
                    ImageJ’s ImagePlot macro, plotted first by median hue on the x-axis and median
                    brightness on the y-axis, and then by standard deviation hue on the x-axis with
                    standard deviation brightness on the y-axis. This allows us to more analytically
                    compare the summed frames. We thus expect to see a horizontal distribution of
                    images in the rainbow spectrum of hues (i.e., from red on the left through green
                    in the middle to violet on the right), with brighter images moving upwards.
                    While sourcing and creating digital copies of these texts from DVDs, I
                    discovered that older, softer prints often resulted in lighter summed
                    z-projections. I also question how accurately color was reproduced in
                    transferring older films to home video format, particularly whether or not the
                    color was balanced properly and whether the proper color saturation was achieved
                    (and to that matter, who would be the authority on the proper color of an
                    eighty-year-old print and what it means to speak of a film’s projected
                    brightness, which comes down to the age and brand of the light bulbs in the
                    projectors which originally screened these films). So we should be careful not
                    to read too much into our results when comparing films to each other, although
                    we can immediately see patterns and outliers of interest. 


                
                    Graph of summed frame z-projections of the Disney corpus, plotted by
                        median hue [x-axis] and median brightness [y-axis]
                    
                

                
                    Graph of summed frame z-projections of the Disney corpus, plotted by
                        standard deviation hue [x-axis] and standard deviation brightness
                        [y-axis]
                    
                

                Looking at the first graph of median values allows us to spot some clusters of
                    similarly hued films: the airy blue in the upper right corner that I have
                    discussed, but also the surprising similarity in the upper left between comic
                    western 45 Home on the Range and the video game
                    world of 52 Wreck-It Ralph, whose long outdoors
                    sequences in desert-like Sugar Rush Kingdom influenced the hue. The majority of
                    the films are clearly within the blue register, in a tall stack ascending from
                    14 Peter Pan to 35 Hercules, but there is also quite a bit of variance in hue that
                    covers the spectrum almost completely. 02 Pinocchio, whose image looks rather plain and flat, is
                    uniquely the most violet-hued, even more so than the brighter 36 Mulan which has clearer areas of purple. Many pairs of
                    films are practically on top of each other, such as 40 The
                        Emperor’s New Groove and 34 The Hunchback of
                        Notre Dame, 21 Robin Hood and 27 Oliver & Company, and 18 The
                        Sword in the Stone and 31 Aladdin;
                    remarkably, each of these pairings were separated by at least five other
                    releases, suggesting that while the summed frames can be surprisingly similar
                    this is not necessarily due to the same animators or production methods (for
                    instance, The Sword in the Stone and Aladdin are nearly identical and yet were made nearly
                    thirty years apart). This visual evidence of hue and brightness would suggest
                    further archival research to examine how consciously Disney animators wanted to
                    distinguish their use of color from other films.
                Plotting by standard deviation, rather than median values, allows us to quickly
                    see some outliers: 33 Pocahontas, 36 Mulan, and 44 Brother
                        Bear. Brother Bear shifts aspect ratios
                    from 1.75:1 to 2.35:1, so the first 28.7% of the film has black side pillarboxes
                    which make it deviate predictably in terms of both hue and brightness. Excluding
                        Brother Bear, the next film with the most
                    deviation in brightness is 05 Bambi, which confirms
                    what I suggested earlier about the strangeness of the dark bottom line versus
                    the lightness of the top of the frame. Curiously, Pocahontas and Mulan, two of Disney’s
                    three films about ethnic women, are both nearly equal in terms of brightness but
                    completely opposite in terms of hue; that is, compared to the other films,
                        Mulan displays much more deviation in the hues
                    that make up its summed image, but very little deviation in its brightness (the
                    third, 42 Lilo and Stitch, is differently hued but
                    is also one of the least bright films). Mulan bears
                    even more deviation than 51 Winnie the Pooh; this
                    is difficult for one to tell at first given Mulan’s
                    even brightness compared to Winnie the Pooh’s
                    varied brightness. But just as we did with the summed z-projections, we can also
                    create graphs of median hue and brightness for each individual film using our
                    folder of slices. Here are three, plotting as I did before median hue on the
                    x-axis and median brightness on the y-axis, illustrating how the brightness and
                    hue of Mulan, Pocahontas, and Bambi’s individual
                    slices do and do not contribute to the overall summed effect. 

                
                    Individual frames of Mulan plotted by median
                        hue [x-axis] and median brightness [y-axis]
                    
                

                
                    Individual frames of Pocahontas plotted by
                        median hue [x-axis] and median brightness [y-axis]
                    
                

                
                    Individual frames of Bambi plotted by median
                        hue [x-axis] and median brightness [y-axis]
                    
                

                From these visual thumbprints or style spaces,Lev Manovich  uses the term style space to describe a visualization
                        where visual differences are
                            translated into spatial distances in order to be more easily
                        compared.  we can quickly confirm our earlier results and see that
                        Bambi’s frames are much more frequently
                    distributed at the darker bottom of the graph than the other films, and that
                        Pocahontas’s are very much concentrated in one
                    band while Mulan has a wider range. While I will
                    not discuss them in depth here, examining such plots for each individual film
                    allows researchers to compare signatures and see how internally consistent the
                    films are: Mulan’s summed image makes it look
                    almost entirely violet, but we see that a good percentage of the film is
                    actually red–orange hued. This can be a crucial tool for digital humanities
                    approaches to film and media studies, particularly in terms of quantifying the
                    consistency of a film’s visual style or the historical shifts in a production
                    studio’s filmic look. Here are two such visualizations of the style signatures
                    of all fifty-five films, first a montage plotting the median hue and brightness
                    for each film, followed by a combined image plotting the median hue and
                    brightness for every slice used in this project. The first montage shows how
                    individual films’ varying hue and brightness create a unique signature; the
                    second shows the combined hue and brightness of the entire Disney corpus,
                    offering an unprecedented macro-view of all of their films.


                
                    A montage of graphs of individual frames for each Disney film, plotted by
                        median hue [x-axis] and median brightness [y-axis]
                    
                


                
                    All the frames of Disney films used in this project, plotted by median hue
                        [x-axis] and median brightness [y-axis]
                    
                


            

                Contexts
                I conclude by putting these summed frames into a larger context. As futuristic or
                    speculative as this work might seem, it is in fact very much in line with
                    mid-twentieth-century formalist theories of literature that sought to treat the
                    text not as the inspired culmination of an author’s intellectual genius, but as
                    an objective structure open to grounded analysis. In addition to contemporary
                    digital humanists and experimental media artists, I am also inspired by what
                    readers will no doubt recognize as a rather old-fashioned line of thought:
                        the structuralist activity
                    described by Roland Barthes in 1963, from which even he had moved on by 1970’s
                        S/Z. Barthes begins his essay by rejecting
                    categorizations of structuralism as a school, movement, or even a set of
                    vocabulary, and instead proposes that we understand structuralism more simply as
                    an activity, a labor experienced by both artists and critics. In this
                    formulation, the structuralist critical activity has as its goal to 
                reconstruct an object in such a way as to manifest thereby the rules of
                    functioning (the functions) of this object. Structure is therefore
                    actually a simulacrum of the object, but a directed, interested simulacrum, since the imitated object makes
                    something appear which remained invisible or, if one prefers, unintelligible in
                    the natural object .
                To show how an object works is to reconstruct that object, to make a copy of that
                    object that reveals something hidden or illegible in the original. Thus for
                    Barthes, the structuralist activity of imitation requires an emphasis on
                    technique over mere analysis: this activity is real, tangible labor that
                    reconceives art and analysis as a paired activity, rather than seeing criticism
                    as merely the lofty, disinterested contemplation of a work. Likewise, my project
                    does not intend to offer a definitive solution to a digitally-aided analysis of
                    cinema, but rather to provoke inquiry into how meaning is possible and how
                    different meanings arise from different means. These summed frame z-projections
                    quite literally make something appear which
                        remained . . . unintelligible before, and the researcher’s task is
                    to discover in what way these simulations of films are interested
                    simulacra.
                Barthes’s proto-digital humanist approach foregrounds specific meaning-making
                    techniques of dissection and articulation over the scrutiny of works thought to
                    be previously endowed with meaning, and thus it offers a direction for critical
                    analysis particularly appropriate for the digital humanities. While they may
                    prefer to avoid something as unfashionable as structuralism or semiotics,
                    digital humanists would do well to reconsider the framework introduced in
                    Barthes’s essay. Indeed, Franco Moretti’s lauded work on distant reading is in many ways a rewrite
                    and amplification of Barthes; for example, in Graphs, Maps,
                        Trees, Moretti proposes that we adopt a method whereby we 
                        reduce the text to a
                            few elements, and abstract them from the narrative flow,
                            and construct a new, artificial object
                        
                     (italicized in original). These steps of reduction, abstraction, and
                    artificial construction are identical to Barthes’s dissection, articulation, and
                    fabrication of meaning. Stephen Ramsay’s screwmeneutics also invokes Barthes,
                    particularly the well-known distinction between the readerly and the writerly
                    text, which Ramsay connects to two modes of using a library: when a person
                    searches a library for bits of information, she invites texts to be readerly in
                    order to be passively consumed, whereas when a person browses a library, just screwing around, she
                    hopes to encounter writerly texts that might offer 
                        an invitation to community,
                            relationship, and play
                        
                    . Last, Lisa Samuels and Jerome McGann have made a well-known argument for
                        deformance which argues that all interpretation is a function of the poem’s
                            systemic intelligibility and that we should set aside the
                    idea that humanities work applies an interpretation to a text and
                    instead work to discover a text’s system by performing actions on it that render
                    it strange but reveal something organic (italicized in original) .
                Finally, I connect these examples to an older tradition of surrealist engagement
                    with cinema. Film scholar Robert B. Ray calls Barthes the most obvious heir to the Surrealist concern with the
                    fragment and summarizes Barthes’s modus
                        operandi: 
                        if the movies’ relentless unrolling
                            prevents your noticing anything except narratively underlined details,
                            the only response is to stop the film
                        
                    . Unspooling a reel on a film editing table, pausing a VCR, stepping
                    frames back and forth on a DVD, converting a movie into a folder of jpegs on a
                    laptop: all of these ways to stop the film’s emphatic focus on narrative allow
                    for renewed pursuit of an abandoned trajectory of surrealist investigation. But
                    whereas the Surrealists and Barthes were limited to working with modernist
                    technologies such as the camera, photograph, or typewriter, the digital humanist
                    can take advantage of more sophisticated computer-aided methods of stopping
                    cinema. 
                Alongside Barthes’s desire to stop the
                        film, surrealism offers a way to consider the stopped film’s
                    metaphoric unconscious. That is, I want to move beyond the initial step of using
                    digital tools to pause, enlarge, slow down, or re-edit film texts, and towards a
                    second step of using digital tools to modify the film text in a way that reveals
                    its otherwise unintelligible facets. The surrealists in the 1920s, influenced by
                    Freud’s theory of dreams, privileged the unconscious as a more genuine site of
                    creativity and followed his lead in developing strategies to access this hidden
                    part of the mind, emphasizing in particular automatic techniques to
                    shortcut conscious perception and decision-making. Similarly, in my project of
                    digital surrealism, I attempt a computer-based form of automatism, a
                    screwmeneutical, playful, digital surrealist method that extracts what we might
                    metaphorically imagine as a film’s unconscious visual field without
                    conscious intervention. 
                I have given examples here of how summed frame z-projections can open up inquiry
                    around composition, framing, lighting, and color, allowing researchers to gain
                    new information about framing choices or emphasis on specific characters or
                    groups of characters, to offer insight into both the lighting style of
                    live-action films and the imitation of real-world lighting in animated films, to
                    easily reveal outlier films in a corpus, to visualize static shots or repeated
                    camera setups, and in general to either pursue new questions from empirical
                    evidence or visually confirm an intuitive hunch. Future work could extend this
                    method to other corpora of national, historical, or genre films, generating new
                    claims and questions about connections between corpora. This method also lends
                    itself easily to television or other moving image texts, as well as other
                    collections of images such as comic book pages, poetry collections, photographs,
                    or newspapers.
                By pursuing a novel digital surrealist technique that shortcuts expectations for
                    analysis of the visual image, I hope to encourage broader digital humanist use
                    of the interested simulacra as a site for productive research that is
                    both study and invention. While I move back and forth between summed images and
                    the text itself, this is not to reestablish the text’s meaning-endowed
                    authority, but to show the iterative process of making meaning, which requires
                    speculation, experimentation, and art. Barthes further defines the interested simulacrum that
                    underlines his method: 
                        the simulacrum is intellect added
                            to object, and this addition has an anthropological value, in that it is
                            man himself, his history, his situation, his freedom, and the very
                            resistance which nature offers to his mind
                        
                    . The anthropological value of summed film frames speaks very clearly to
                    the contemporary challenges of using a digital humanities approach towards film
                    and media studies: this project is in palpable ways a product of my history as a
                    film obsessive, my situation as a developing scholar in a new field, my freedom
                    to acquire and manipulate digital film, and the constant resistance I experience
                    over the value of this project in its ability to contribute to the scholarly
                    field. For the traditional film scholar, the anthropological value of these
                    images poses a (hopefully liberating) threat to older methods of searching for
                    narrative meaning in the cinema. For the digital humanist, these summed film
                    frames show the resistance both of nature and of our technology, forcing us to
                    confront again the possibility that our faith in the computer’s excellence at
                    producing rational evidence is a flatness we must leaven with a touch of
                    surrealist play. To that end, I conclude with a final image that remains, to me,
                    most fruitfully illegible: the sum of all of the summed z-projections, the sum
                    of 135,000 slices of Walt Disney Animation Studios.


                
                    Summed frame z-projection of all 135,000 frames of Walt Disney Animation
                        Studios used in this project
                    
                

            
