Title:  Digitizing Guardianship Registers in Senegal (1895-1910): Naming as Evidence and 
               Ethical Concern
Volume:  019
Issue:  1
Date:  28 April 2025
Abstract:  
           Drawing from research on liberated minors, formerly enslaved children whom the colonial state in Senegal 
              entrusted to guardians following their emancipation, this article describes the process of building a database consisting 
              of identifying information about formerly enslaved children in early colonial Senegal based on data 
              originally collected in the early twentieth century, and it uses the database to ask both historical and ethical 
              questions about naming practices and aliases, experiences of unfreedom, and the agency of marginalized African children. 
              Of the 1,324 liberated minors who entered guardianship in Saint-Louis from 1895 to 1910, for example, at 
              least 114 of them took on another name at some point, a fact that raises interesting questions about naming, name 
              changes, and agency. I argue that names contain fragmentary evidence about their bearers' cultural or linguistic 
              background or geographic origin, and, more importantly, that aliases can offer insight into social networks or 
              self-fashioning. Yet reproducing names from colonial inventories in digital history projects could reinscribe oppression 
              and violence and, in some circumstances, could contribute to stigma and shame among descended communities. As such, 
              scholars should include them in databases and other digital history projects, but only if ethical concerns can be 
              addressed and resolved.
           
         
Full Body Text: 

          
            This article describes the process of building a database consisting of identifying information about formerly enslaved 
               children in early colonial Senegal based on data originally collected in the early twentieth century, and 
               it uses the database to ask both historical and ethical questions about naming practices and aliases, experiences of 
               unfreedom, and the agency of marginalized African children. Derived from records related to the guardianship of 
               so-called liberated minors — children who, without their parents, sought official recognition of their freedom in the 
               decades after the French emancipation law of 1848 went into effect in Senegal — this data consists of 
               children's names, approximate ages at liberation, gender, and regions of origin, along with other information, including 
               names of parents (if known) and names and occupations of guardians. This article highlights the significance of naming 
               in the archival record, suggesting that children's names and their name changes or aliases offer insight into certain 
               aspects of their identity and allow informed speculation about some of their experiences under guardianship while also 
               raising ethical questions.
            
            Efficient and thorough analysis of these records requires the use of digital tools and, most particularly, a database 
               created from the original guardianship records. There are compelling reasons to make such a database widely and freely 
               available. Importantly, a database derived from these data would shed light on a population — African children — that 
               has often been obscured by or absent from written records. Scholars and students could use the data to examine trends 
               in child slavery and liberation in nineteenth-century Senegal, identifying patterns in gender and age, 
               much like Goodwin et al. have done with the much larger Senegal Liberation Registers database 
               . They could also use such a database to study social networks in urban 
               Senegal, by paying particular attention to data on the members of prominent families who served as 
               guardians, or to explore questions about child labor, particularly domestic service, or urban poverty. In addition to 
               scholars and students, broader publics, especially Senegalese people living in their country or in the diaspora, could 
               engage with a database by contributing additional data or interpretations and thereby shaping the production of history, 
               conducting genealogical research, or by learning more about slavery and emancipation in West Africa. As a 
               public-facing database that would feature named individuals and bits of information about their lives, this project 
               would join other digital history projects on slavery in the Atlantic world (such as LiberatedAfricans.org, 
               SlaveVoyages.org, or the many datasets and projects within Enslaved.org) in honoring those who experienced enslavement, 
               emphasizing their individuality and humanity and even telling their stories .
            
            Yet, as Risam has pointed out, there is danger in replicating the colonial archive in digital form, since 
               this can reinscribe colonial power structures and knowledge hierarchies . Perhaps 
               more importantly for these records, their sensitive nature (names of formerly enslaved people) and the particular 
               context in which they were produced (Senegal, where descent from enslaved people can result in stigma) 
               raise important ethical questions about whether names should be shared, questions that are complicated by the fact that 
               important lines of inquiry hinge upon tracing and interpreting names and name changes themselves. Using an early 
               prototype of my guardianship database — which currently is not public-facing — I think through what names might teach 
               us and some of the ethical considerations around using them. I argue that names contain fragmentary evidence about 
               their bearers' cultural or linguistic background or geographic origin, and, more importantly, that aliases can offer 
               insight into social networks and self-fashioning. As such, scholars should include names in databases and other digital 
               history projects, but only if ethical concerns can be addressed and resolved.
            
        

          Guardianship and Records of Marginalized Children
            After the 1848 French emancipation law came into effect in Senegal, officials worried that recently freed 
               children, especially those without parents, might threaten stability and economic productivity in the colony. The 
               French administration responded in April 1849 by establishing a system of guardianship for these liberated minors, 
               entrusting them to local notables who took on responsibility for liberated minors' well-being and education or training 
               in return for rights to their labor. During the decades that followed, a significant number of unaccompanied minors were 
               among the 28,930 enslaved people who left their enslavers in areas where slavery remained legal to seek recognition of 
               their freedom in Saint-Louis, Dakar and other towns and outposts under direct French control. 
               Officials thus relied on the guardianship system to ensure basic maintenance and training for these children. Still 
               more children entered guardianship as victims of trafficking, as slave traders used the system to obscure an illegal 
               trade in enslaved children into the colonial capital and other towns.Saint-Louis, Gorée, 
               several French outposts along rivers or the coast, and eventually also Rufisque and Dakar. 
               Officials recorded names, approximate ages or birth years, and a variety of other demographic information for each 
               person they liberated, producing a wealth of historical documentation that scholars can now use to learn a lot about 
               slavery and emancipation in Senegal, as Goodwin et al. have explored in an initial article 
               on their ongoing digital humanities project utilizing the Senegal Liberation Registers. Furthermore, 
               Goodwin et al. found that unaccompanied minors accounted for 16% of all people 
               seeking liberation from 1894 to 1903, the period with the richest data . It is 
               difficult to quantify the total number of children who entered guardianship, but Martin Klein has estimated 
               that 1,019 children entered the system from 1872 to 1885, and I have identified over five hundred children recorded 
               between 1849 and 1874 and at least 1,620 recorded from 1895 to 1911, when the practice seems to have ended 
               (M3, ANS; ).The guardianship registers for the earlier period (1849 to 1874) 
               include children with a wider range of identities and social positions — orphans, apprentices, and liberated minors — 
               and it is often very difficult to determine an individual's status based on the information given. My numbers for the 
               earlier period are therefore necessarily estimates. The Archives Nationales du Sénégal catalogs do not 
               include guardianship registers for 1874 to 1895, which may mean that they were not preserved.
            
            From its creation in 1849 until its disappearance sometime in the 1910s, guardianship generated records — in varying 
               degrees of detail and at a range of intervals (and sometimes with years-long gaps) — about the children it was meant to 
               supervise. At a minimum, these records consisted of the names of children and their guardians and basic demographics, 
               since officials needed this information as they tried to administer the colony with the trappings of modern bureaucracy. 
               For a little over a decade, guardianship councils in both Saint-Louis and in Gorée worked to 
               identify unaccompanied minors — not only those who had officially received liberation from slavery, but also orphans 
               and abandoned children — and to select their guardians. Instructed to submit an annual report to the governor each 
               year, the president of the guardianship council, a position assigned to the assistant mayor in each town, would have 
               needed to keep track of these children. There is some evidence in Senegal's archives that Mr. 
               Hericé, president of the Saint-Louis guardianship council from 1849 to 1855, made at least a 
               half-hearted effort to do this during his first few years in the role. An 1857 reform required the presidents of the 
               councils to collect specific information, enter it into a register, and publish it in the official newspaper, the 
               Moniteur du Sénégal. Another reform in 1862 dissolved the councils altogether, giving the 
               head of the judicial service responsibility for placements, oversight, and maintaining records, with the help of 
               auxiliaries in Gorée and certain French posts. Although Frédéric Carrère seems to have 
               produced copious documentation of guardianship during his tenure as head of the judicial service in the 1850s and 1860s, 
               a series of his successors fell short in their record-keeping duties, as the lieutenant governor complained in 1903 and 
               as research in Senegal's archives today will confirm.While the records for this period include one 
               list of liberated minors, organized alphabetically by name, which was meant to include everyone who entered guardianship 
               prior to 1864, most of the records were organized by date or by claim (reclamation, i.e., a request made 
               by a resident to obtain guardianship over a child or to arrange apprenticeship, a complaint about a ward, a change in 
               guardianship, etc.). See file M3, ANS. I have not located any records for Gorée during this period 
               (Arrêté, 13 Apr. 1849, M3, ANS; ; ).
            
            In the early twentieth century, in the context of France's increasing discomfort with domestic slave 
               trading and slavery itself in French West Africa, Lieutenant Governor Camille Guy and 
               Governor General Ernest Roume undertook an investigation of guardianship. It was an open secret that many 
               notables had abused guardianship, which had long functioned as a cover for a continued trade in enslaved children to 
               French-controlled territories. Once trafficked, these children could be liberated, entrusted to a guardian, and 
               then required to work for their keep. Guy argued that a long history of poor record-keeping had hamstrung 
               oversight and allowed this exploitation, and Roume seemed to agree. Indeed, in two reforms of guardianship 
               in 1903 and 1904, Roume sought to address abuses by improving the state's knowledge of and surveillance 
               over liberated minors, a responsibility he delegated to newly created guardianship surveillance commissions 
               (Lieutenant Gouverneur to Gouverneur Général, 4 May 1904, K23, ANS; Arrêté, 24 Nov. 1903, SEN/XIV/28bis, 
               ANOM; ; ) .
            
            The commissions' first task, undertaken in 1904, was to track down all the liberated minors entrusted to guardians 
               since 1895, to update and correct their records, and to take note of their current situation. After that, commissions 
               were to convene — first monthly, and then on a quarterly basis — summoning dozens of liberated minors to appear at 
               each meeting so that their health, living circumstances, and status as a minor could be ascertained and documented. The 
               Saint-Louis commission functioned regularly from 1904 until at least 1910, producing fascinating and 
               occasionally rich documentation of guardianship in its final years. The commission in Dakar likewise left 
               some records, as did the cercle commandants who supervised guardianship in places like 
               Podor, Kaolack, Dagana, and Kedougou 
               . Much completer and more numerous for the early twentieth century than for the earlier 
               period, the registers and lists maintained by the surveillance commissions during these years form the core data sets 
               for my database, which includes over 1620 minors who entered guardianship in 1895 or later.
            
            Particularly important is a register the administration produced in May 1904 as it attempted to track down all liberated 
               minors who had entered guardianship since 1895 and update their information or — if they had reached majority, married, 
               had a child, or died — remove them from guardianship. Seventy pages long, the register is arranged chronologically by 
               date of liberation, with one row of information completed for each minor arranged under these column headings: 
               number-order; date of liberation name and birthplace of the freed person; their age [at liberation]; birthplace; name, 
               profession, and dwelling of the persons to whom the minor under 18 years was entrusted; and observations. It includes 
               935 names of children liberated from 1895 through 1899 and in 1904; 1900 through 1903 are missing (Liste des mineurs, 
               H(S)173, ANS).The full title of this document is Liste des mineurs délivrés de la captivité 
               et confiés à la tutelle de M. le Procureur Général, Chef du Service Judiciaire depuis l'année 1895. There were 
               only 24 minors with liberation dates in 1904, since the program was on its way out by then; the number of children 
               entering guardianship in the other years ranges from a low of 166 in 1899 to a peak of 199 in 1896. Only a subset 
               of the many more adults and accompanied children liberated from slavery during these years, these numbers reflect the 
               intensity of enslavement, slave trading, and illegal trafficking in children ongoing in Senegal and the 
               wider region at the turn of the twentieth century.
            
            What makes this dataset particularly compelling and unique is its ability to trace change over time and to offer 
               multiple datapoints — each representing an encounter between a liberated minor and a member of the administration or 
               guardianship commission — for at least 375 children, thanks to the existence of additional source material and, most 
               usefully, a series of lists entitled something like this: Inventory 
               [état] of liberated minors entrusted in Saint-Louis and for whom the Commission 
               established by the 30 November 1903 ordinance for the surveillance and protection of said minors, must observe the 
               presence, along with the material and moral situation during the month of [MONTH 19__]. The archive contains at 
               least twenty-nine such lists recorded at monthly and then quarterly meetings held in Saint-Louis from 
               October 1904 through November 1910. Each list includes names of and information about the 41 to 70 liberated minors 
               whose guardians responded to a summons and appeared, with the minor in question, before the guardianship commission for 
               evaluation. The commission filled out hand-drawn standardized tables for the first few years but switched to a 
               machine-printed version in 1906 and 1907; the tables essentially copied the column headings used in the register 
               described above, meaning that there is considerable consistency in the approach to recording data.These 
               inventories are found in the following files in the Archives Nationales du Sénégal (ANS): H(S)173, 
               H(S)174, H(S)176, H(S)177, and H(S)178; the initial census of liberated minors, conducted in May 1904, is in H(S)173. 
               Other sorts of documents in these files and in H(S)175, H(S)206, 1F1, and K23 provide additional qualitative data about 
               specific liberated minors and are incorporated into the database as well. This feature of the data, which allows 
               scholars to follow some liberated minors over a decade or longer and to sketch stories about their lives, makes it 
               particularly useful to scholars of childhood and of post-emancipation societies, and it sets this dataset apart from 
               many digital history projects in a similar vein (such as those that make up Enslaved.org) which aggregate data 
               generated in single encounters.
            
            All records of liberated minors are handwritten and though the documents themselves are in good condition, the 
               readability of the handwriting varies. In addition, French officials, often unfamiliar with African names, recorded 
               them using phonetic spellings and likely did so with at least some variation, which researchers must try to identify and 
               address. Indeed, although the association of each person with an order-number was meant to promote accuracy and 
               consistency in the register and inventories, researchers could easily reproduce errors made by members of the 
               commission or administration, or introduce new errors related to readability or other difficulties with the documents. 
               Even so, the dataset has remarkable potential to reveal certain details about children's lives and experiences in 
               post-emancipation Senegal and their encounters with the colonial state through the guardianship system.
            
            When creating my database, which currently exists as a prototype in spreadsheet software (Microsoft Excel and Google 
               Sheets), I reproduced some organizational elements from the original register and inventories, but also added numerous 
               fields that allowed me to combine information from multiple sources and to track certain details that helped me answer 
               specific research questions about children's everyday lives. The case in my database is the individual liberated minor, 
               and I included every name I found as I conducted research across at least nine dossiers in Senegal's 
               archives and in published sources (i.e., this is not a subset of a larger record). Thus, as in the original documents, 
               there are columns corresponding to each minor's date of liberation, name (separated into given and family name), 
               birthplace, age at liberation, details about their guardian, and observations. To this, I added fields where I could 
               record information about subsequent guardians (since many liberated minors were reassigned at some point), and dates of 
               subsequent appearances before the surveillance commission along with additional observations made at those appearances. 
               I also inserted fields to track information that I generated through interpretation, including whether minors were male 
               or female, were returned for reassignment, ran away, reached majority, had a baby, married, were sent to prison, 
               traveled to France with a guardian, received an apprenticeship, died, or — most important for this 
               essay — used an alias or changed their name. Children who entered guardianship before 1895 are not currently part of 
               this database because officials kept records very differently in the early period. Performing more interpretive work on 
               the records from 1849 to 1874 and adding at least one field to track children's status (liberated minor, free, 
               apprentice, orphan, etc.), would allow me to include even more records in the future.
            
            I developed these fields as I read thousands of entries about liberated minors, and I think they, and the database they 
               organize, work well as a point of departure. To move toward making this a public-facing digital humanities project, I 
               would need to complete a number of tasks related to digital data generation and organization: cleaning up existing data, 
               exploring options for more user-friendly software, and developing a comprehensive metadata application profile, to name 
               a few. I would also need to revisit the research and interpretation, preferably with a research team well-versed in the 
               French language and in Senegalese naming conventions, to better address the handwriting difficulties and phonetic 
               spellings mentioned above, to develop best practices for representing marginalia and markings added by officials who 
               reviewed these records, and to establish a method for cross-referencing other kinds of documents (such as letters or 
               reports) in which names from the database appear. The most important challenge, however, and the issue I explore in the 
               rest of this essay, relates to ethics — namely the ethics of making public the names of children who were once 
               enslaved.
            
        

          Names and History Writing in Senegal
            As my description of the records of Senegal's liberated minors makes clear, these sources feature 
               names — names of the formerly enslaved, names of their guardian(s), and, in rarer instances, names of 
               other people who were or who became important to them. These specific names are valuable data in and of 
               themselves, since analysis of their geographic or linguistic origins or their appearance across multiple sources could 
               offer insight into the demographics of post-emancipation Senegal, social networks and connections in 
               specific urban areas, and other themes. Name changes or aliases captured in the documentation could, as I suggest in 
               the following section, raise questions about what prompted them and open new avenues to consider children's actions and 
               experiences.Similarly, Margaret Williamson argues that scholars can learn a lot about enslaved 
               persons in Jamaica through careful analysis of inventories and lists of names 
               . She suggests, much like I do below, that the use of certain kinds of names may have 
               resulted from agency on the part of enslaved people. The inclusion of names can also work as commemoration, by 
               naming people who were previously nameless in our historical accounts and in official public memory 
               . Yet although digitizing these names could support scholarly endeavors and 
               activists working among people with slave ancestry, making them publicly available could also subject descended 
               communities to shame, discrimination, or other harms given the continued stigma of slave descent found in many 
               West African communities. After an exploration of one line of historical inquiry about names in Senegal — 
               the use of aliases by liberated minors — which illustrates some of the benefits accrued to historical knowledge by 
               naming names, I reflect on some of the ethical issues that would emerge were I to make my database public.
            
            We might read the inclusion of names — of the self, of family members, of places significant to life experience — in 
               records related to slavery or other marginalized statuses as powerful assertions of personhood, claims to memory, or 
               indicators of identity or origin. As Pier Larson pointed out in an essay on narratives of enslavement by 
               Africans enslaved as children, narrators often remembered their parents and homes and could sometimes name them 
               . Goodwin et al. make a similar point in their analysis of the 
               Senegal slave liberation registers, noting that fifty-two percent of unaccompanied 
               minors were able to state both parents' names at liberation . This adds nuance 
               to Orlando Patterson's argument that slavery produced social death, by 
               emphasizing the importance of the memory of kin and community . Given that the information 
               included in the guardianship records seems to have been collected from formerly enslaved children themselves, the 
               entries can allow some insight into what — and who — these children remembered and how they identified themselves. 
               To explore these themes, users of a digital history project would need to access the names as they appeared in the 
               documents.
            
            My liberated minors database revealed that name changes or aliases were strikingly common in this population, since 
               records for at least 114 of the 1324 Saint-Louis liberated minors included one. Indicated with 
               dit or dite (i.e., 
               known as) before the new name, none of the records indicate who chose the alias or who 
               decided to notify the guardianship council of its use, and the timing of their introduction into the records varied. 
               The May 1904 register of liberated minors includes approximately thirty records that mention an alias, suggesting that 
               the child was already using the name when the register was compiled (Liste des mineurs…, May 1904, H(S)173, ANS; 
               Liberated Minors Database). Other aliases were introduced into the records later — sometimes only after the child had 
               appeared before the commission several times. Given that naming and renaming was an act of power or empowerment, 
               claimed by enslavers and often reclaimed by emancipated people, the introduction of aliases into the guardianship 
               council records raises questions about power, agency, and identity. Especially when combined with other sources related 
               to guardianship, these records provide hints of what might have been formerly enslaved children's strategies to reclaim 
               names and possibly also identities.
            
            Of the 114 aliases introduced into the liberated minor registry, thirty-one were French names. In all but about three 
               cases, the liberated minors who came to be known by French aliases, such as Marie, Madeleine, or Pierre, had been 
               entrusted to métis, or French guardians. Those entrusted to African guardians 
               overwhelmingly went by African or Muslim aliases (some 65 cases), while only about ten liberated minors with French or 
               métis guardians were known by African or Muslim names. These trends prompt questions 
               about who selected the aliases and why. Did French guardians assign French names as an indication of the power they 
               held over liberated minors, thus continuing the naming practices we associate with slavery? Did they choose French names 
               for their wards because they did not care to learn to pronounce or to have to remember African names? Could the decision 
               have represented an effort to promote assimilation or inclusion within the household? We could pose similar questions 
               about aliases that originated in the region or were linked to Islam. Did African guardians choose aliases with local 
               significance to assert control over wards whose names suggested foreign origins and ethnicities (such as Bambara)? Or 
               did they do so as a sign of affection, assimilation, or inclusion? Were liberated minors placed with Wolof guardians, 
               for example, more likely to use Wolof aliases? Regarding all name changes, is it possible that the 
               children themselves initiated them? Could the use of an alias have been a strategy for obscuring their past and 
               avoiding stigma? Could it perhaps represent affection or belonging?
            
            As noted above, the records suggest that many liberated minors began using an alias at some point long after their 
               liberation and after their first appearance before the guardianship commission, though the later introduction of an 
               alias could simply reflect council members' efforts to correct wrong or incomplete records. For example, young 
               Souvergné, thought to be five at the time of her liberation on 20 September 1898, appeared at least twice 
               in the registers of the Saint-Louis guardianship commission — in May 1904 and July 1905 — without an alias. Her entry 
               for September 1906, however, indicated that she was now called Aram. Her 
               guardian, M. Boubou, a court orderly, and his wife, Mme. Boubou (who became 
               Souvergné/Aram's official guardian in March 1900), may have been 
               métis, since Africans were not usually assigned these titles of respect (Monsieur and 
               Madame) in the registers. The alias, Aram, appears to derive from an Arabic/Muslim name, raising the 
               question of whether Souvergné/Aram selected the name herself, or whether her guardians 
               assigned it to her. By 1907, she had had a baby, and the register indicated that her name should be stricken from the 
               list of those under guardianship. This final reference to her did not include dite 
               Aram (this is atypical, since for most other liberated minors who took on aliases, each subsequent 
               entry repeated the dit or dite 
               language) (Liberated Minors Database). Might this indicate that she stopped using the name after having her baby, or 
               that she planned to stop using it when removed from guardianship? Of course, these questions cannot be definitively 
               answered by these sources alone, but they move us forward by encouraging us to ask them.
            
            Although most aliases consisted only of a first name (prénom), a few records include 
               alternative first and surnames, sometimes the family name of the liberated minor's guardian. For example, on 2 August 
               1898, authorities recognized the liberty of a young girl who had come from the 
               Bambaras and was estimated to be five years old, recording her name as Nanténé. It 
               appears that the girl continued to go by Nanténé for her first nine or ten years as the ward of 
               Coumba M'Bissine Gueye, a laundress in N'Dar Toute. Records of her appearance in April 1905 
               before the Saint-Louis commission indicate only that she was well-kept and 
               happy and say nothing about an alias. But the next time she appeared in the commission's records, in October 
               1906, a note added to the observation column indicated that she went by the name of 
               Séga. This alias and a notation that she was doing fine appeared in the five additional entries recorded 
               in 1907, 1908, and 1909, and the fourth-quarter entry for 1909 indicated that she achieved majority by virtue of having 
               had a child. Before her removal from guardianship, however, Nanténé/Séga had begun 
               complaining (along with some other liberated minors and guardians) about the frequency with which she had to come before 
               the commission, and in September 1909, she submitted a letter to the commission to this effect. Strikingly, the letter 
               gave her name as Siga Gueye, daughter of Mme. Koumba Mbisine and 
               referred to her guardian as her mother (Liberated Minors Database; 17 Sep. 1909, 
               Siga Gueye, fille de Mme. Koumba Mbisine à N'Dar Toute to President Tribunal, H(S)178, ANS; 
               ). We cannot be sure about authorship, power relations, or other 
               circumstances surrounding the creation of this letter. Yet the incorporation of the guardian's surname into the 
               liberated minor's alias raises the question of whether this reflected fictive kinship between 
               Nanténé/Séga and her guardian, the guardian's claim to rights in the girl, or something else 
               entirely.
            
            In rare cases, I have been able to triangulate sources, tracking a liberated minor through the records of the 
               guardianship commission meetings and in other kinds of evidence, especially police records and letters 
               from guardians, that allow for more extended insight into a particular moment of the child's life. Perhaps the most 
               exciting example is the case of a girl whose name was recorded in the guardianship records as Boyerika at 
               the time that she was liberated in August 1902, at the approximate age of 
               seven.Boyerika appears numerous times in the guardianship registers in 
               this form, though I think it is more likely to be a combination of two or more shorter names. One possibility is that 
               the final syllable, ka, was the surname Ka or Kâ, a common name 
               in the region associated with Peul people. Boye is a Peul given name meaning long awaited, 
               and I am unsure what to make of the middle ri syllable in this rendering. See 
               Association Nationale pour La Promotion des Patrimoines Sénégalais, 
               http://www.facebook.com/988756457973749/posts/1652304014952320/ 
               (Accessed: 22 August 2020). Her story is fascinating because, though she ultimately took or received an alias, a 
               later police report suggested that she continued to go by Boyerika, the name she had given to officials at 
               liberation, raising compelling questions about self-fashioning among formerly enslaved people.
            
            After her liberation, Boyerika was entrusted to Mlle. Maria Lacoste of 
               Saint-Louis, a woman whose family name, use of the title Mademoiselle, and residence in the predominantly 
               Christian Sud neighborhood of Saint-Louis suggest that she was French or 
               métisse. When Boyerika appeared before the commission in December 1905, 
               commissioners reported that she was doing well and appeared to be twelve or thirteen years old, but they made no note 
               of an alias or name change. In their next record, however, dated November 1906, commissioners wrote that she was 
               called Fanny, and this alias appeared in six of the other seven entries 
               recorded through 1910 (Liberated Minors Database). Yet other correspondence, generated outside the space of the 
               commission, suggests that she continued to be called Boyerika.
            
            In April 1909, a Mr. Leconte contacted the secretary general to request permission to take 
               Boyerika dite Fanny with him when he returned to 
               France. He noted that the administration had entrusted the girl to him following Mlle. 
               Lacoste's death some time before and that he, in turn, had sent his ward to stay with Limali Diop, 
               a carpenter's wife, while he traveled out of the colony.The records are a bit confusing, since the commission 
               registers say nothing of Mr. Leconte, indicating only that by October 1908, Boyerika's 
               guardian had changed from Mlle. Lacoste to the wife of carpenter Limalé Diop. Before 
               granting the request, the secretary general corresponded used the margins of Mr. Leconte's letter to ask 
               another official for more information. In his response, which explained that Limalé Diop had given the 
               girl to M. and Mme. Leconte to accompany them to France and that the liberated 
               minor would return to the African woman upon her return, the official broke convention and referred to the girl 
               only as Boyerika (no dite 
               Fanny; 23 Apr. 1909, Leconte to Secrétaire Général, H(S)206, ANS).
            
            Similarly, in January 1911, the police commissioner used only the name 
               Boyerika in communication with the lieutenant governor about his efforts to 
               track down nine liberated minors who had not appeared before the commission's most recent meeting. 
               Boyerika's case is particularly interesting, because of both the variation in how the commissioner 
               referred to her and the news he learned about her. She appeared on the lieutenant governor's list as 
               Boyerika, dite Fanny, 16 and 
               the first part of the commissioner's comments repeated this formulation. Limalé Diop, he wrote, claimed 
               that she had given the summons to the minor Bayérika 
               dite Fanny and had expected her to appear before the commission 
               on her own. Next, the commissioner shared information he claimed to have learned from the girl herself, and he rendered 
               her name differently as he summarized the justification she had provided: Bayérika 
               declares that she left Abdou Diop [Limalé's husband], because she was not well cared for, and 
               she took refuge with Doïner Diop, living in Nord. According to Bayérika, 
               she simply forgot to visit the commission (Liste des mineurs, Réunion 21 Jan. 1911, H(S)178, ANS; 4 Feb. 1911, 
               Commissaire de Police to Secrétaire Général, H(S)178, ANS).
            
            It is significant, I think, that these sources imply tensions between what the guardians (at least those who were 
               French or métis) called this liberated minor and her own apparent name preference. This 
               constellation of documents offers glimpses of some of the ways marginalized people may have engaged in self-fashioning 
               and encourages us to take names and naming seriously, as a possible method of not only restoring names of enslaved 
               people to history, but also learning about how they may have shaped their daily lives. Indeed, the specifics of names 
               and name changes — their association with a particular ethnicity, religion, region, or community; their commonality as 
               chosen nicknames, and so on — are datapoints that we can use as we try to better understand ordinary experiences in 
               early twentieth-century Senegal. Attention to names and aliases might also lead us to consider how people 
               navigated a colonial regime that valued fixed and recorded identities. In these ways, the specificity of names, whether 
               given, inherited, selected, or imposed, can be central to a historical methodology and would need to be known to the 
               researcher to be used as such. This aspect of my database and analysis — which tracks multiple contacts between 
               individual formerly enslaved children and representatives of the state over time and which takes seriously shifts in 
               how the names were recorded — might serve as a model to others working on similar kinds of digital history projects.
            
        

          Names and Ethics
            Using the actual names of marginalized people in the past raises important ethical concerns related to potential 
               effects on descendants living today and the need to avoid reinscribing the oppression and epistemic violence that is so 
               often contained within the colonial archive . Digital history projects encourage 
               much wider circulation of data and analysis than traditional academic publications — this is a central goal of the 
               digital humanities — and we therefore cannot assume that creators can predict who will use the information and to what 
               end. This fact has led many digital humanists to decide against including sensitive material in publicly accessible 
               projects, and this precedent raises questions about how to handle names of formerly enslaved people in West 
               Africa. It is well known that stigma associated with enslaved ancestry can affect people's status, marriage 
               prospects, and access to resources, and that it may drive them to remain in patronage relationships. Scholars have 
               explored some of the ways that descendants of enslaved people in West Africa have tried to improve their 
               status — by hiding their enslaved origins, seeking to rehabilitate them, or renegotiating relationships with former 
               enslavers or patrons    
               . Digital humanities projects that provide searchable databases of names of the (formerly) 
               enslaved might facilitate these efforts of rehabilitation or might assist in people's efforts to trace family history, 
               but they could also have the unfortunate and unintended consequence of reinforcing stigma or revealing descendants' 
               previously hidden origins in slavery. Yet on the other hand, Lotte Pelckmans has found that some Ful'be 
               living in contemporary Mali have sought to obscure enslaved ancestry partly by changing their names, 
               suggesting that a project like mine could provide useful information about historical precedents and contexts.
            
            Creating a publicly accessible database of names of liberated minors in Senegal also raises ethical 
               questions related to knowledge production and reproduction. Because it would bring names of formerly enslaved people 
               into an online public space, we could view such a digital database as a monument to those who were enslaved, a virtual 
               wall of names that could, if done right, help 
               rehumanize enslaved people by naming them and providing biographical information about 
               them. In this way, it could contribute to the project of recovery that Kim 
               Gallon positions as a central concern of Black digital humanities. But, to extend to the digital arena, 
               Ana Lucia Araujo's critique of the lists of names of enslaved people that appear in many physical sites 
               memorializing slavery, a database would fail to achieve this if it presented only names and skeletal information and 
               if descendants of the people named were not involved. Indeed, as Araujo and others point out, most 
               records pertaining to slavery (and by extension, to recognition of individuals' emancipation), such as plantation 
               inventories, bills of sale, ship logs, and insurance records, represent the perspectives of enslavers and slave 
               traders  . The case I focus on here is a 
               little different, since these records were produced not by enslavers but by colonial officials tasked with recognizing 
               liberation from slavery in an orderly way. But the fact that French officials pitched better record-keeping as a key 
               strategy to reform guardianship in 1903 and 1904 underscores the extent to which they viewed collection of data as a 
               technique of governance and colonial power. Thus, the information they collected reflected colonial preoccupations, as 
               did its organization and preservation, and uncritical replication of it could reinscribe colonial power structures.
            
            Scholars who rely on the colonial archive have long sought to challenge their internal logics and power structures by 
               adopting an expansive approach to archival research, reading sources against the grain, and asking questions that the 
               data was not necessarily intended to address   
               , but digital projects must go farther. In her recent book on postcolonial approaches to the 
               digital humanities, Roopika Risam calls upon scholars to work in a way that avoids merely replicating 
               colonial archives — and therefore the epistemic violence of continued omission and 
               marginalization — in digital form . Postcolonial digital archives, she suggests, 
               can become projects that invite users to draw on their own knowledge and resources while engaging with content in 
               innovative ways, perhaps by contributing annotations, suggesting alternative organizational frameworks, tagging 
               materials, or identifying related content. She also suggests that deeply engaged tagging and cross-referencing — of 
               complete sources and, when possible, the component parts of longer sources — might allow people to make new 
               connections between items cataloged in different files or held in different archives. Projects might even incorporate 
               digitization of items from private collections or museums, or they might rely on cultural knowledge — solicited, 
               freely given, and acknowledged — of people living in the places under study to interpret or explain records in a 
               digital collection.
            
            A recent study of the names of liberated Africans, which were recorded at the same time that British and international 
               courts worked to combat the illegal transatlantic slave trade in the first half of the nineteenth century, provides one 
               model for engaging a broader public in the production of knowledge. Researchers put out a public call for help 
               identifying geographic origins and cultural content of names associated with Igbo speakers, and numerous Nigerians 
               responded with a wealth of information . By broadening the scope of historical inquiry 
               and directly engaging the public, digital humanists can democratize access to and produce new knowledge, and I will aim 
               to pursue this approach.
            
            Yet this approach may be challenging. It seems relevant that historians of Senegal, several Senegalese 
               news outlets, public intellectuals, and members of the Senegalese public have engaged in rigorous debate in recent 
               decades about history and memory of the slave trade, but this debate has not centered on the issue of whether and how 
               to memorialize named victims of slavery or the slave trade, or whether such marginalized people should be named in print 
               or online. Instead, it has considered the meaning and symbolism of a UNESCO World Heritage Site on Gorée 
               Island, the Maison des Esclaves (Slave House), juxtaposing its importance as a 
               site of memory of the slave trade with the history of the transatlantic slave trade, in which the Maison figured 
               minimally if at all. The debate has also positioned Africans only or mostly as victims of the slave trade and has paid 
               little or no attention to the internal slave trade, to the existence of African traders, or to the incidence of slavery 
               within Senegal. This is due, Cheikh Sene notes in a recent article, to the shame associated 
               not only with enslaved ancestry but also with descent from slave traders, and to the intentional forgetting that 
               has primed closer connections with the African diaspora and elevated Gorée in tourist circuits 
                . This debate raises questions about how Senegalese 
               intellectuals, leaders, and community members would respond to a publicly accessible database of named liberated minors. 
               Are they simply focused on other issues, or would they find such a database offensive or painful? Would they engage or 
               contribute to a crowdsourcing effort, when invited? Before moving forward with any plans, I would need to partner with 
               Senegalese scholars who could help ensure cultural appropriateness and sensitivity and who could assist with community 
               engagement efforts.
            
        

          Conclusion
            This essay has offered a reflection on what (digital) historians and those who engage with their work might gain from 
               naming names of formerly enslaved people in digital history projects, and on the ethical issues that might give them 
               pause about revealing names. Using several examples from a database of formerly enslaved children in 
               Senegal, it shows that names and name changes — aliases — can carry fragments of information about 
               children's life experiences, backgrounds, and social ties. Though the names lead to more questions than answers, they 
               are useful datapoints, especially given that we know comparatively little about the daily lives of enslaved and recently 
               emancipated children in African history. If recorded names were replaced by pseudonyms or codes — approaches commonly 
               used to protect research subjects' identities and safeguard their interests — researchers would not be able to 
               duplicate the sort of analysis that I offer above.
            
            Using real names in an effective digital history framework with well-chosen tagging can also enable cross-referencing, 
               allowing users to make connections between sources found in disparate parts of an archive or perhaps in different 
               archives altogether, much like I was able to do in the case of Boyerika discussed above. The recurrence 
               of some of these names across multiple inventories leads to a unique aspect of this database: namely, that it indexes 
               fragments of individual children's lives derived from repeated appearances before the guardianship commission, allowing 
               scholars to trace changes or continuities over time. And further, by connecting names of at least some formerly enslaved 
               people to documents that reveal other aspects of their stories, whether it was the relationship cultivated with their 
               guardian or another person, the neighborhood in which they lived, the work they performed, or something else about them, 
               we can move beyond the wall of names approach that Araujo rightfully calls 
               into question. Effective digital repositories would allow users to make these kinds of connections more easily and 
               would also provide context, analysis, and stories that go beyond the names. In addition, by inviting users not only to 
               read content, but also to interact with it, contributing their own stories, reactions, or analysis, a digital 
               repository based on guardianship records could adopt an inclusive post-colonial stance. Such a dynamic collaborative 
               project could also help activists, historians, and others respond to the need to remember domestic slavery in 
               West Africa as a means of breaking through stigma and allowing people of enslaved descent to reclaim 
               identities, as Eric Hahonou and Lotte Pelckmans advocate 
               .A model digital history project might be the Jamaican Slave Names Project, 
               http://jamaicanslavenames.com/.
            
            Ethical issues go beyond concerns about reproducing the logics of the colonial archive, however. Since enslaved 
               ancestry carries stigma in many West African societies still today, scholars need to consider whether a public-facing 
               digital database could be used to connect contemporary West Africans to enslaved ancestors and how this might affect 
               people today. Thus, any public database or other digital history project that includes names of enslaved or formerly 
               enslaved people in West Africa must be done in close cooperation with partners in the region to minimize 
               the possibility of stigma or other harm, to promote cultural sensitivity, and to work toward decolonizing digital 
               history. Such a project could democratize access to the information, allow others to engage in related research, and 
               contribute to the important work of highlighting Black histories in digital spaces. Perhaps most importantly, if 
               ethical concerns can be resolved in collaboration with local partners, names offer potentially rich insights into 
               moments in ordinary — even marginalized — people's lives and digital tools allow us more effectively to trace and 
               connect the fragments.
            
        

          Acknowledgements
            I wish to thank the organizers of and participants in The Ethics and Politics of Naming Names of Enslaved Africans in 
               Digital Humanities workshop (hosted virtually by Stanford University in October 2022), who helped me begin 
               to think through these ideas. I appreciate timely and incredibly useful feedback from the editors of this special 
               issue, Walter Hawthorne, Richard Roberts, Fatoumata Seck, and Rebecca 
               Wall, and from the anonymous reviewers. And I am infinitely grateful to Jessica Mack, whose 
               generosity with her time and knowledge allowed me to better understand key debates in digital history and to sharpen 
               my arguments.
            
        

          Archival Sources
            Archives Nationales du Sénégal, Dakar Sénégal (ANS)
              
                1F-Police et sûreté
                H-Santé et assistance publique
                K-Travail et main d'oeuvre, esclavage
                M-Justice
              
            
            Archives Nationales d'Outre-Mer, Aix-en-Provence, France (ANOM)
              
                SEN/XIV-Travail et main d'oeuvre
              
            
        
