Title:  Deconstructing Bricolage: Interactive Online Analysis of Compiled
               Texts with Factotum
Volume:  009
Issue:  1
Date:  26 May 2015
Abstract:  
            Textual bricolage, the unacknowledged re-use of chunks of existing texts within a new
               composition, spans the liminal space between authorized, publicly shared, and
               de-authorized texts. While it can result in unique literary juxtapositions, bricolage
               also challenges the boundaries of authorial ownership. Understanding the methods and
               responses to textual bricolage reflects how a culture engages with textuality. Yet
               such study is often hindered by the sheer extent of compared texts. In this article
               we explore the potential of using Factotum, text similarity recognition software with
               visual interface, for analysing textual bricolage. Using examples from medieval and
               recent texts, we discuss different compilation techniques as well as the interaction
               between the notions of authorship, plagiarism and intertextuality. 
         
Full Body Text: 

            Introduction
            Early in 2010, Helen Hegemann’s autobiographical novel of teenage angst Axolotl Roadkill (2010), a ball
                  lightning in prose form and language as one review described it, became an
               instant sensation in Germany.Ein
                        Kugelblitz in Prosaform und Prosasprache,
                  . The book’s jarring format, its multiple
               layers and dimensions, its playful juxtaposition of the staid and known to expose
               fresh, unknown patterns, struck a chord among critics:  ... all
                  that which has been thought of, said, done, and accomplished a hundred times
                  already she has absorbed, bundled, and transformed into something entirely new and
                  unheard of, in an approach to literature that is beautiful not despite but because
                  of its hardness, brutality, and vulgarity.
                     ... all das, was schon hundertmal
                           gedacht, gesagt, getan und getragen wurde, hat sie aufgesogen, gebündelt
                           und in etwas ganz Neues, Unerhörtes verwandelt, in den Ansatz zu einer
                           Literatur, die nicht trotz, sondern wegen ihrer Härte, Brutalität und
                           Vulgarität schön ist,
                     
                  
            The 17-year-old author was on track to receive the prestigious Leipzig Book Fair
               Prize when accusations of plagiarism began to surface after a reader recognized a
               number of passages, some amounting to entire pages, copied without acknowledgment
               from the novel Strobo by .
               Soon the list of unacknowledged sources grew to include a number of other novels, as
               well as excerpts from songs, movies, blogs, and interviews. What critics praised as a
               juxtaposition of seemingly different voices turned out to be precisely that: a
               compilation of fragments of the works of others enveloped by Hegemann’s own words.
                  Axolotl Roadkill was withdrawn from prize nomination
               in the middle of what became one of Germany’s most involved public debates on the
               nature of authorship and plagiarism in the internet age .
            The critical response to  Axolotl Roadkill brought into
               prominence a tension inherent in artistic manipulation of existing texts. Hegemann’s
               opponents argued that the book’s large-scale borrowing did not acknowledge its
               sources and thus constituted plagiarism. By disregarding the authorial rights of
               others, Hegemann breached a set of conventions between writers, publishers, and
               distributors that have been developing since the introduction of the printing press
                  ; ; . Her supporters, on the other hand, could refer to a long
               tradition of unacknowledged textual borrowing: the technique of cento,
               poems composed entirely of appropriated lines, which predates Christianity; the
               ubiquitous unreferenced allusions to canonical texts like the Bible, Goethe’s Faust, or the plays of Shakespeare; or the artistic practice
               of textual bricolage consisting of conscious appropriation and transformation of
               chunks of existing texts ; .
               Viewed from the latter perspective Axolotl Roadkill did
               not introduce something radically new, only pushed the boundaries of convention —
               something artists are expected to do, after all.
            But the boundaries that distinguish textual appropriation, allusion, and plagiarism
               are not easily drawn with precision. In communities with established textual canons,
               the recognition by the reader of an unreferenced canonical allusion is a mark of
               belonging, even status. In a work like Melville’s Moby
                  Dick or Joyce’s Ulysses, the occasional
               verbatim borrowing adds another layer of meaning and pleasure to those who can
               recognize the appropriation. The allowable extent of such borrowing is not strictly
               defined, though. And even the most strictly regimented intellectual communities, such
               as medieval universities, could be inconsistent in applying their conventions.
               Medieval authors did recognize a hierarchical order of texts based on their
               authoritative value and proximity to truth . By
               convention, the voice of an auctor carried what we would call authorial
               originality, while works of authors who did not yet reach auctoritas
               were often appropriated without acknowledgment. In reality, though, many works or
               their sections appeared under the names of other authors or were deauthorized
               altogether. Whether this happened by authorial choice or through the decision of
               subsequent copiers and readers, the results were not dissimilar to the
               intertextuality of Hegemann’s novel ; . 
            Postmodern literary intertextuality has been even more playful and subversive of
               conventions. The erosion of the concept of a literary canon, combined with the
               vastness of the global cultural sphere, has brought attention to the extent to which
               artistic creation is in fact re-creation of existing models. As Rachel Galvin puts
               it, Cast positively, cultural recycling may be viewed as homage,
                  pastiche, parody, or ludic recombination; on the flip side, it engages in
                  deception, forgery, theft, plagiarism, hoax, usurpation.
               . A work that depends almost exclusively on other
               texts makes the distinction difficult, leaving the reader uncertain whether the
               extensive dependence reflects clever artistic choice or thinly disguised theft. The
               belated insertion of references into editions of Axolotl
                  Roadkill suggests that Hegemann’s use of Strobo may have been intentionally disguised — that the text was
               deauthorized, decontextualized, and re-used as raw material. Did Hegemann commit
               theft, or did she engage in cultural recycling along the lines of Barthes’ death of
               the author? Critics remain divided as to the appropriate moral judgment, and the text
               itself gives us little insight into her intentions. 
            While the moral judgment of Hegemann’s textual appropriation remains uncertain, the
               novel reflects an increased interest in textual bricolage — composition by
               extracting, rearranging, modifying, and compiling large chunks of pre-existing texts
               — facilitated by instant access to a growing multitude of freely available online
               texts ; ; . To a medievalist, the phenomenon brings interesting
               parallels with intertextual practices of the Late Middle Ages and Early Modern Era.
               It reminds us that conventions regarding the use of sources not only differ among
               textual communities, but change over time. However, an understanding of the processes
               inherent in bricolage and compilation is often hindered by the overwhelming extent of
               compared material. 
            In this paper we explore the possibilities of analyzing textual bricolage with text
               recognition software Factotum, developed by a team of researchers at Monash
               University in Melbourne, Australia. Originally conceived as a tool to study the
               early-fourteenth-century encyclopedia Speculum morale
               composed almost entirely of unacknowledged sources, Factotum has developed into a
               tool for visual comparison of intertextual relationships between large texts. While
               software like Turnitin www.turnitin.com effectively identifies the
               sources from which an author borrows, Factotum offers a platform for identification
               and analysis of the compiler’s method of arrangement, and thus for recognizing the
               interplay of different authorial and textual voices. Accomplishing in seconds what
               could take even a trained reader weeks or months of meticulous work, Factotum opens
               up space for critical analysis of ways in which texts can be manipulated to create a
               significantly altered or entirely different message. 
         

            Textual borrowing in medieval compendia
            Intuition, aided by popular representations like Umberto Eco’s Name of the
                  Rose, tends to associate the Middle Ages with a scarcity of books,
               jealously guarded and accessible to the initiated alone. There is some truth to the
               stereotype as far as the situation in much of medieval Europe is concerned. But when
               it comes to major centers of knowledge production like Paris, the stereotype becomes
               too simplistic. In the thirteenth century, Vincent of Beauvais (c. 1190-c.1264),
               composed a three-volume encyclopedia, the Speculum
               maius, not because of a lack but because the multitude
                  of books, brevity of time, and instability of memory do not allow the soul to take
                  in equally all that is written.
               
                  Quoniam multitudo librorum et temporis breuitas memorie
                     quoque labilitas non patiuntur cuncta que scripta sunt, pariter animo
                     comprehendi ...
                  .  Its three books (the Speculum historiale, the Speculum
                  naturale and the Speculum doctrinale) provide
               a compendium of learning, so that one book could stand for many. Vincent was also
               creating a guide to sources whose use among ever-multiplying treatises and
               commentaries was often less than reliable. His method, expressed in words that offer
               an interesting comparison to Hegemann’s novel, recognizes that the innovation lies
               not in the contents themselves but in the way they are presented: ... this work is at once both new and old, both brief and prolix: look, it is
                  ancient in its contents and authority, but new in its compilation or arrangement
                  of parts; it is brief inasmuch as many sayings were constrained into compact form,
                  but nevertheless long due to the immense multitude of subjects.
                     ... hoc ipsum nouum opus quidem est simul et antiquum,
                        breue quoque simul et prolixum : antiquum cette materia et auctoritate,
                        nouum uero compilatione seu partium aggregatione, breue quoque propter
                        multorum dictorum in breui perstrictionem, longum uero nihilominus propter
                        immensam materie multitudinem,
                     .
            The degree of self-awareness and high standards of editorial practice make Vincent’s
               work a landmark of compilation, but also a rather unique occurrence . Many of his contemporaries, while
               equally dependent on the works of others, exercised a more liberal approach to
               utilizing them. After the massive influx of textual material produced in the
               thirteenth century, succeeding generations of scholars often chose to adjust and
               reuse rather than compose entirely new texts. A good example is the work of Pierre
               d’Ailly (1351-1420), which borrows without restraint or acknowledgment from the
               writings of Jean de Mirecourt, Gregory of Rimini, William of Ockham or, as in this
               instance, the prayer of Boethius asking for divine inspiration, also imitated by Alan
               of Lille : 
                  
                     Boethius: [...] pater, angustam menti conscendere sedem,
                           / da fontem lustrare boni, da luce reperta / in te conspicuos animi
                           defigere visus. Alan of Lille: [...] da bleso tua
                           verba loqui mutoque loquelam.
                     Pierre d’Ailly: Tu, domine, da lumen in corde, da verbum in ore, da
                        celestem menti conscendere sedem, da fontem lustrare boni,
                           da luce reperta in te conspicuos animi defigere visus, da bleso tua verba
                           loqui mutoque loquelam. 
                  
               
            
            One way of dealing with such compilations would be to classify them as plagiarism and
               reject them as recycled or vulgarized versions of more
                  pure originals: an approach that has been applied to medieval
               thought since the sixteenth century . But this would not
               only subject these works to notions of authorship postdating their composition by
               several centuries; it would also prevent us from understanding the full context of
               reception and actual use of those works we consider original, authoritative or
               innovative . Pierre d’Ailly was neither the
               only scholar resorting to such practice, nor did he or his contemporaries perceive it
               as problematic or culpable.
            Given the shortcomings of the expression plagiarism, Monica Calma has adopted the
               term bricolage, used by literary scholars, to characterize medieval compositions that
               closely follow an (often unacknowledged) original, alternating verbatim copying with
               paraphrase, rearrangement, and additional comments. Bricolage differs from allusion
               and direct quotation by utilizing more extensive verbatim chunks of the original, and
               by re-using texts from a wider spectrum of authoriative values, including those that
               did not achieve the status of an  auctoritas
               . Calma’s suggestion not only makes sense of the work of
               Pierre d’Ailly, it also opens up the interpretation of a large body of sources
               hitherto underrepresented in research or ignored altogether.
            Medieval preachers’ aids and collections of moral examples are among the most
               dependent on other works. An excellent illustration is the extensive encyclopedia of
               moral philosophy and theology  Speculum morale
               , associated with Vincent of Beauvais but composed after
               1300, at least a generation after his death. The work contains an extensive coverage
               of human behavior, a topic not covered by Vincent of Beauvais. Yet it has been
               largely ignored by scholars based on the assumption it has simply been
                  plagiarized from six unacknowledged
                  primary sources — with the largest borrowing from Thomas
               Aquinas’ (1225-1274) Summa theologiae — that alone
               deserve close study ; . In
               fact the Speculum morale demonstrates how an unknown
               author has participated in the transformation of traditional ethics by introducing a
               new theory of emotions formulated by Aquinas, in particular his important and
               innovative discussion of emotions as in themselves morally neutral. On the
                  originality of Thomas Aquinas’s thinking about emotions, see . Unfortunately, such insights
               are difficult to extract from a work heavily dependent on verbatim transcription, in
               the same order, of the responses to Aquinas’ questions, as in the example below.
                  The text in the image is taken from an analysis by the Factotum program. It
                  uses a transcription of the Speculum morale owned by
                  the Monash Factotum team and a publicly available text of the Summa theologiae (http://www.corpusthomisticum.org).
            
            
               In the right column is the original text of Aquinas’ Summa. In the left column is the same text as appropriated by the
                     Speculum morale. Highlighted bold font identifies
                  exact verbatim match; sections of regular highlighted font mark slight
                  alterations, such as the use of v for u or sicut instead of
                     sic.
               
            
            The size and nature of the Speculum morale make thorough
               textual analysis a daunting task. The most recent definitive study was completed by
               Jacques Echard in 1708 and extends to over 600 pages. No one has attempted to
               replicate his efforts since — discouraged no doubt as much by the 1558 columns of the
               printed edition as by Echard’s conclusion that the Speculum
                  morale is a more-or-less worthless farrago of a clumsy plagiarist . And yet, as Echard himself admitted, the
               compiler was not entirely a mindless copier of his sources. At times he changed the
               order of Aquinas’ articles, paraphrased, eliminated, or inserted passages from other
               sources and his own observations. In other words, the Speculum
                  morale is more than the sum of its parts. Its voices bear traces of actual
               use of Aquinas’s works, as well as of the interplay of theology, philosophy, and
               sermon source material during a period of consolidation of medieval scholasticism. 
            Understanding the interaction of the mass of threads that comprise the Speculum morale entails the creation of a correspondingly
               massive research apparatus. Echard’s linear expositions of textual parallels run to
               hundreds of pages of lists: our Excel spreadsheet has three tables corresponding to
               the three books of the encyclopedia and a total of 837 rows at 13 columns each, with
               additional tables for more detailed analysis. For a close reading, rather than
               relying like Echard on a superb memory and intimate familiarity with French archives,
               the Monash team has approached the task by using the experience in electronic
               plagiarism detection and the increasing availability of electronic texts . The result of the efforts is text recognition software
               Factotum. Factotum enables us to move away from the plagiarism mindset by mapping the
               mutual relationships of the sources of Speculum morale
               identified by Echard, and by focusing directly on places where the original material
               is transformed or rearranged, rather than on the overwhelming bulk of verbatim
               transcriptions from other sources. 
         

            Deconstructing bricolage with Factotum
            Factotum (http://webfactotum.com)
               combines experience with plagiarism detection software Damocles (http://viper.csse.monash.edu.au/damocles/about/) created by David McG.
               Squire, the specific needs of historians analyzing compiled texts, and expertise in
               algorithms suitable for advanced text recognition. It allows for comparison of texts
               within its own database, or of user-contributed texts against all other texts within
               the program. The outcome can be simple identification (e.g. recognition that the
                  Speculum morale has textual similarities with the
               Vulgate version of the Bible or with the Summa
                  theologiae of Thomas Aquinas), close comparison of two chosen texts, or
               deep analysis in which all textual parallels are explored among a number of selected
               texts. 
            The program operates as a web application written in Scala (http://www.scala-lang.org/) using the
               Lift web framework (http://www.liftweb.net/), and is built around two core elements: algorithms
               and data structures relevant to analysis and interaction tasks, and a graphic
               interface that addresses the needs of analyzing large texts. Factotum is designed to
               process raw textual material into a canonical form that can be readily matched, to
               align inexact matches over sub-sequences of billions of words of text, to link
               together separate matching components of a passage that may be split over multiple
               source texts, and to reconcile the entire match data set into an HTML display that
               the user navigates interactively without ever having to download the full text or
               match data set. After selecting search criteria like the number and order of words in
               a searchable sequence, the user is able to select matches to record in permanent
               reports that are also stored and displayed on Factotum, and can be exported into
               LaTeX for easy inclusion in publications. For a more detailed technical
                  description of Factotum, see www.webfactotum.com and . Complete source code
                  is available at https://github.com/dnikulin/factotum/.
            
            An essential characteristic of Factotum, key to its thinking beyond plagiarism, is
               the availability of visual representations that allow the user not only to identify
               the location of source texts within a document (overall view), but also to study
               their transformation and mutual relationships (scrollable side-by-side parallel
               view).
            The overall view, a visual display of the presence of a source text within another,
               is a graph that bears some similarity to DNA sequencing images. For the purposes of
               an instant overview, each text is divided into horizontal segments of 400-point
               width, where each point represents a cluster of matchable content which and becomes
               highlighted in the instance of a positive match. For example, the dependence of the
               first book of  Speculum morale on the Summa theologiae below reveals the heavy presence of the
                  Summa in the Speculum
                  morale, but also its spatial distribution within the Speculum’s 1049 clusters (top part of the graph) along with the extensive
               recourse to the innovative central part, Prima and
                  Secunda Secundae, of Aquinas’ Summa (the higher density of highlighted areas in the central portion of
               the lower part of the graph). 
                  
                The overall view display allows the researcher to gauge the extent of
               potential textual coincidence, as well as to analyze a particular part of the
               document by selecting a highlighted segment. 
            While the horizontal layout of the overall view provides a global survey of the
               works’ mutual relationship, the vertical layout of the scrollable side-by-side
               parallel view allows for close textual comparison of individual passages. The two
               columns let the reader navigate through the entirety of either text, marked with
               highlights identifying parallel passages. Numbered hyperlinks at the end of each
               matching passage identify the locations of textual parallels in the related document.
               By clicking on the hyperlink, the texts will align at the location of the match
               Figure 3.
            
                Sample view of the side-by-side parallel view showing a textual match between
                  the Speculum morale (left) and the Summa theologiae (right). The numbered hyperlinks refer
                  to the location of the passage within the compared document, in this case section
                  1424 of the Summa and section 24 of the Speculum morale.
               
            
            In the case of the Speculum morale, the visual display
               allows easy access to the compiler’s method. We have already seen an example of pure
               copying from the Summa; the example in Figure 3 shows another common
               method, a combination of text from arguments of Aquinas’ Summa
                  theologiae followed by a more-or-less verbatim citation of the
               conclusion.
            The bolding of matching text and highlighting of related passages facilitates instant
               recognition not only of textual borrowing but also of lacunae and paraphrase, as in
               the section on human works in the Speculum morale (Figure 4). 
            
               
            
            In this example, the compiler used a passage from the Summa
                  theologiae but altered the meaning of the sentence. Aquinas’ statement
                  Primo igitur modo, res sensibiles exterius apparentes movent
                  voluntatem hominis ad peccandum, secundo autem et tertio modo, vel diabolus, vel
                  etiam homo, potest incitare ad peccatum (Therefore in the first way,
               sensible things appearing on the outside move the will of man towards sin, but in the
               second and third way either the devil or even man himself can incite to sin) belongs
               to the section on sin, hence the focus on the different channels of temptation. But
               the author of the Speculum morale used Aquinas’ text in
               another setting: the principal origin of human works, both good and bad. In the
               compiled version, much of Aquinas’ wording was preserved, but also amended to point
               out the usefulness of the created world: Therefore in the first
                  way, sensible things appearing on the outside move the will of man toward the good
                  or the bad, just as contemplation of created things moves and induces man to
                  praise the wisdom, honor the omnipotence, and love the goodness of the
                  creator...
            
            The changes made by the compiler are relatively insignificant in terms of word count,
               but they, along with the methods of rearranging sources, make the Speculum morale a work with its own character. Factotum
               allows the reader to recognize the extent of borrowing, observe the modes of textual
               rearrangement, and finally focus on passages where the transformation of material or
               addition of unidentified passages becomes interesting. Instead of months of reading
               and comparison, the task of identification and highlighting of parallels is reduced
               to seconds. 
            Selecting different keyword cluster lengths, searching for word clusters in random
               order within larger groups of words, or expanding the search by a number of words
               before and after matched cluster results in a variety of results that can suit a wide
               range of texts. Figure 5 shows the search set at six keywords exactly, a
               convenient setting for a text heavily dependent on verbatim borrowing such as the
                  Speculum morale. Choosing lower numbers, or ignoring
               word order, will result in a larger numbers of false positives but may be suitable
               for the study of paraphrase, more subtle textual borrowing, or for shorter texts.
                  For a more detailed description of the search options, see www.webfactotum.com. 
            
            
               
            
         

            Bricolage in Moby Dick and Breivik’s Manifesto
            Because Factotum does not rely on a specific dictionary, it can be used to uncover
               several layers of intertextual relationships in any language. Here we present two
               examples in English, one identifying the presence of the King James Bible in Herman
               Melville’s Moby Dick, and the other examining the extent
               of borrowing from Ted Kaczynski’s Unabomber Manifesto in
               Anders Breivik’s manifesto 2083 A European Declaration of
                  Independence.
            While Moby Dick
                can hardly be called a bricolage, Melville’s
               incorporation of exact quotations from the King James Bible along with paraphrase and
               allusions offered a great test case for Factotum. On the most basic level, the
               program identified verbatim quotations, such as the presence of the text of Jonah in
               the chapter called The Sermon. The visual presentation reveals Melville’s elaboration
               of Jonah 1.8-1.10, as well as the insertion of the reference to the hand of God, with
               links to multiple occurrences of the phrase in the Bible. 
            
                Textual parallels between Herman Melville’s Moby Dick
                   (left column) and the King James Bible (right column).
               
            
            In another case, the darkness, and the weeping and wailing and
                  teeth-gnashing was matched against Matthew 8:12 (link 2602 in the left
               column below), but also against Matthew 22:13 (link 2657) and 25:30 (link 2672). This
               case shows both the strengths and the limitations of Factotum. The reference to
               Matthew is not noted in some editions, as the Mansfield-Vincent edition of 1952. In
               this case Factotum did identify an unnoticed textual coincidence. But at the same
               time the program failed to recognize the word Tophet — which the edition does comment
               on — because the smallest cluster recognizable by Factotum consists of three words
                  .
            
               
            
            Apart from clearly identifiable biblical matches, Factotum identified a number of
               loose matches — possible paraphrase, analogy, or false matches. In chapter three,
                  The Spouter Inn, an interesting parallel with Luke
               17:34 appeared in the context of two men sleeping in one bed Figure 8. We will leave aside the question of whether Melville was thinking
               of the Gospel of Luke or simply describing a scene. What the example does demonstrate
               is Factotum’s processing of loosely analogous or rephrased passages. As the search
               settings move away from exact matching, the number of potential matches will
               increase. 
            
               
            
            The flexibility of search settings and precision of matching can result in
               concordance-like comparison of the occurrence of a particular passage in another
               text. Thus Factotum picked up the parallels between Melville’s repeated use of the
               word seven hundred and seventy-seven, and its occurrence in a number of places in the
               King James Bible, two of which are shown in Figure 9.
            
               
            
            Depending on the settings, Factotum can identify dozens or hundreds of matches of
               varying faithfulness to the original wording of the text. Instant access to results
               allows the researcher to overview different matches, reject false or marginal
               matches, and focus on the most promising ones. While the probability of discovering
               hitherto unrecognized biblical parallels in a text studied as closely as Moby Dick is
               minimal, the different recognition filters allowed by the settings allow for the
               study of the different layers of textuality present in the novel, and offer a layer
               of macro-perspective on the heteroglossia present in Melville’s work . 
            A compilation like Anders Breivik’s manifesto, on the other hand, is an ideal subject
               for Factotum. The right-wing extremist’s 2083: A European
                  Declaration of Independence [2011] is a compilation of acknowledged and
               unacknowledged sources ranging from St Bernard’s founding manifesto of the Knights
               Templar In praise of a new knighthood, to contemporary
               extremist conservative blogs, and Ted Kaczynski’s Unabomber
                  Manifesto [1995]. Breivik’s approach to his sources is similar to that of
               the compiler of the Speculum morale, in that he
               appropriates entire passages with minimal author input. Yet as van Gerven Oei [2011]
               has pointed out the changes to the text, minute in extent, are important to
               understanding Breivik’s motives and mindset.
            Factotum comparison of 2083: A European Declaration of
                  Independence and the Unabomber Manifesto (Figure 10)
               reveals both the extent and nature of Breivik’s borrowing ; .
            
               
            
            In scope, the borrowing from Kaczynski is relatively minor, amounting to only a few
               of the work’s 1500 pages. Breivik draws from the opening passages of the Unabomber manifesto and concentrates them into two distinct
               sections, clearly visible in the graph above. Visual comparison of the two texts,
               displayed in Figure 11, reveals near-verbatim reproduction of Kaczynski’s text by Breivik,
               with subtle changes confirming the observation made by van Gerven Oei that Breivik
               appropriated a text referring to specifically American conditions and
               recontextualized it in European settings. 
            
               
            
            Kaczynski, writing about leftists, locates political correctness
               among university professors, who have secure employment with
                  comfortable salaries, and the majority of whom are heterosexual, white males from
                  middle-class families. Breivik incorporates the accompanying text, but his
               version refers to cultural Marxists, and adds government
               employees, politicians, journalists, and publishers in government broadcasting
               companies to Kaczynski’s university professors, while replacing white
                  males with Ethnic Europeans. In a similar manner,
               Kaczynski’s list of women, American Indians, and homosexuals as groups with which
               adherents of political correctness identify is transformed in 2083 by replacing American Indians with so-called oppressed
                  minorities, and inferior with other
                  groups in the victim hierarchy.
            Our example replicates van Gerven Oei’s findings as an illustration of Factotum’s
               ability to identify matching passages, additions, lacunae, and rearrangement of
               originals, along with providing a global visual overview of the relationship of the
               compiled text to its source. The instant access to potentially significant passages
               spares the researcher wading through a mass of text, much of which is copied
               verbatim, and focus on material that can produce a more solid analysis.
            Due to copyright restrictions we did not scan and process Hegemann’s Axolotl Roadkill [2010] against Airen’s Strobo [2010] in their entirety. The situation has its ironies, but even
               an analysis of select passages through Factotum does suggest that Hegemann was
               engaging in more than simple cut-and-paste bricolage. For example, she slightly
               reworded clusters of dramatic scene descriptions, as in the discussion of sex in Figure 12. 
            
               
            
            In another scene, in which drugs play an essential role, she doubled Airen’s quarter
               (Viertel des Pulvers) of powder to a half (Hälfte), before swerving the discussion in
               a new direction (Figure 13).
            
               
            
            In all the textual parallels we identified, clusters of Airen’s text were adjusted by
               slight rewording and recontextualization. They are distinctly Airen’s, yet they
               appear as such only to those familiar with the original, making the result similar to
               students’ unconventional use of texts by paraphrase, usually classified as plagiarism
                  . To the unaware reader the chunks, borrowed from
               another text, simply vanish and become, as the reviewer noted, absorbed, bundled, and transformed into something entirely new and unheard
                  of. With Factotum, they — and the transformations they have undergone —
               become visible again. 
         

            Beyond plagiarism
            In their defense strategy, Helen Hegemann and her lawyers argued that the author was
               not plagiarizing but recasting, in the manner of a visual-arts collage, elements of
               other material to create an authentic work with integrity of its own. Airen, whose
               novel Strobo she used as raw material, rejected such a
               possibility outright: This [Strobo]
                  is not a novel; it is my life as I lived it. I have not made it up. Helen Hegemann
                  hasn’t experienced it. It is I who have experienced it this way.
               Das ist kein Roman, das ist mein Leben gewesen. Ich habe
                     mir das nicht ausgedacht. Helene Hegemann hat das nicht erlebt. Ich habe das so
                     erlebt,
                  .
            
            Airen’s complaint is shared by the critics of the writer Kathy Acker as much as by
               Jacques Echard who denied any integrity to the compilation Speculum morale. To them, words based not on actions but on other words
               can only result in a simulacrum, a vague approximation of the
                  real experience whose source must be acknowledged and given
               preference. But with the abandonment of a rigid definition of originality by literary
               and cultural studies, and the recognition that permutations of existing discourse can
               create new meaning, authenticity may be too vague a factor in examining textual
               bricolage. For all intents and purposes, Hegemann’s novel creates not only an
               illusion but the reality of literary truth — a mark, at least according to some, of
               its integrity . 
            By consciously reusing unacknowledged texts, bricolage spans the liminal space
               between authorized, publicly shared, and de-authorized texts. Understanding how some
               discourses are endowed with the author function while others are deprived of it  can offer us a map of how a culture engages
               with textuality. In the medieval academic world, texts of scholastic authors who had
               not yet reached the rank of auctoritas or authority (and sometimes even
               afterwards) became the common currency of their near-contemporaries who amended and
               transformed their work without acknowledgment. A similar situation is found among
               today’s university students whose practice of weaving commonly used definitions from
               Wikipedia into their essays is often tacitly ignored by lecturers . On the other hand, unreferenced use of authorized
               research sources, or extensive verbatim borrowing, will result in penalty. Hegemann’s
               belated retraction can be taken as an acknowledgement that she has crossed the
               currently accepted boundaries of convention. However, as our example of the Speculum morale  has shown, the boundaries between
               acceptable and unacceptable intertextuality are not constant. In this light, the
               proliferation of re-use of readily available online texts represents another stage in
               an identifiable evolutionary process. 
            The visual access to detailed analysis of textual parallels that Factotum offers can
               lead to a better understanding of how borrowed texts are shaped and reorganized, and
               how they interact with others. In that, it can provide a counterpoint to the
               observations of medievalists and literary scholars who have shown that a subtle
               authorial voice can be identified even in texts that defy conventional notions of
               authorship . Factotum has already contributed to the
               discovery of a new source of the Speculum morale, and
               has led to an understanding of the compiler’s technique that would take years to
               achieve using manual methods.
            Even if mechanical identification of textual similarity remains a relatively crude
               tool in the recognition of complex textual interplay in novels like Moby Dick, by identifying matching texts and allowing the
               reader to judge not only the extent of borrowing but also the secondary author’s
               method of recasting the sources, Factotum opens the space for a meta-analysis of
               textual relationships. The experience of making the invisible seams of intertextual
               composition visible, and comparing similar texts side by side, can lead to more
               subtle observations than an outlook dominated by the concept of plagiarism.
            There is a sense in which scholarly attitudes towards textual bricolage and
               plagiarism are already changing. Rather than focusing on the moral implications of
               allegedly timeless and universal principles, scholars like Stanley Fish have called
               for an open discussion of conventions that guide professional practice . The traditional way of dealing with textual parallels has
               been greatly improved by the searching capabilities of Google and proprietary
               databases like Brepols’ Library of Latin Texts,
                  http://www.brepols.net/Pages/BrowseBySeries.aspx?TreeSeries=LLT-O
               as well as by progress in textual processing. Even so, analysis of textual bricolage
               remains time consuming, open to errors, and invites a very rigid, text-based
               approach: the memory, burdened by close study, may end up like the mind of Borges’
               Funes who could remember every piece of text but was incapable of analytical thought
               and comparison. We are hopeful that Factotum is a step in the transformation of the
               way such texts are studied.
         
