Title:  Adobe Photoshop and Eighteenth-Century Manuscripts: A New
                    Approach to Digital Paleography
Volume:  008
Issue:  4
Date:  20 December 2014
Abstract:  
                While research coordinator at the Burney Centre at McGill University in Montreal,
                    I pioneered new digital paleographical methods to support the editorial work on
                    Frances Burney and Samuel Richardson undertaken there. Prior to my
                    interventions, the primary method for reading faint, obscured, and obliterated
                    manuscript texts had been multi-spectral imaging, which is prohibitively
                    expensive, limiting its utility as a general research tool, although it is still
                    sometimes in use. There have not been many alternative digital paleographical
                    methodologies. The potential of image manipulation software, such as Adobe
                    Photoshop, has been noted by a few scholars, but not explored. Working in Adobe
                    Photoshop, I have developed a method of deciphering heavily deleted or
                    obliterated text through the use of layering techniques, altered color levels,
                    and the employment of certain kinds of filters. The method is more advanced than
                    simple image enlargement techniques used by most researchers. Importantly
                    though, it remains far less expensive than multi-spectral imaging. The technique
                    contributed to the recovery of nearly all of the obliterated text in the first
                    two volumes of The Court Journals and Letters of Frances
                        Burney, which were published by Oxford University Press in 2011, and
                    it was also used within in-progress volumes from The
                        Cambridge Edition of the Works of Samuel Richardson. This article
                    discusses the methodology and some of its key results from eighteenth-century
                    manuscripts.
            
Full Body Text: 
Up to this point, the primary method for reading faint, obscured, and obliterated
                manuscript texts has been multi-spectral imaging, first described in A. H. Smith’s
                    The Photography of Manuscripts (1938). For the past
                75 years, multi-spectral imaging has served as the predominant methodology for
                deciphering hard-to-read manuscripts; its continuing usefulness as a paleographical
                tool has been the subject of recent studies  and . The Chester F. Carlson Center for Imaging Science at the
                Rochester Institute of Technology contains a division devoted to cultural artifact
                and document imaging; their projects have required multi-spectral technology to
                recover material from the Archimedes Palimpsest and other historical texts. A
                    further description of the historical manuscript research undertaken at the
                    Center for Imaging Science is available at http://www.cis.rit.edu/people/faculty/easton/manuscripts-short.html.
                Yet the instruments required for multi-spectral imaging – multi-spectral cameras,
                color filters, and digital storage for super high-resolution images – are
                prohibitively expensive, The minimum amount for a customized multi-spectral
                    imaging system for medical imaging use (which could theoretically also be
                    applied to manuscripts) is $25,000, though many cost at least $50,000 . which limit its utility as a general research
                tool. There have not been many alternative digital paleographical methodologies.
                Carl W. Griffin’s survey of the field, Digital Imaging: Looking
                    Toward the Future of Manuscript Research (2006), gestures towards the
                usefulness of image manipulation software, such as Adobe Photoshop, but does not
                describe any particular methods. See also . There are a few current projects, predominantly in the field of
                medieval research, that have yielded results. Cultural Heritage Imaging (CHI), a
                nonprofit corporation, has developed and distributed digital imaging and
                preservation solutions, most of which relate to its innovative computational
                photographic method called Reflectance Transformation
                    Imaging. This method captures the shape and color of a subject, allowing
                the user to adjust lighting directionality to reveal surface information. Through
                this technique, CHI has successfully recovered previously unreadable sections of
                illuminated manuscripts by adjusting levels and using multiple images to piece
                together partial or damaged material with a program called GIMP (GNU Image
                Manipulation Program).GIMP is an open source application which can do almost
                    everything Adobe Photoshop does. See 
                        http://culturalheritageimaging.org/. The methodologies I have
                    developed can be adapted for use on GIMP and other types of image manipulation
                    software that offer a full range of functionality.  Peter Ainsworth and
                Michael Meredith have also developed an electronic tool called Virtual Vellum that enables users to view, transcribe, and manipulate
                electronic versions of manuscripts . Beyond its
                pedagogical and expository applications, the aim of Virtual
                    Vellum is to grant open access to these manuscripts to researchers who
                would not otherwise be able to view them. The digital methodologies I have developed
                serve similar functions to CHI’s Reflectance Transformation
                    Imaging and Virtual Vellum, though mine
                have particular applications for the recovery of deleted and hard-to-read text.
Ultraviolet lighting is also a viable and cost-effective option for recovering
                deleted text. New 35mm cameras cost at least $150, while UV camera filters can be
                found for around $10. This is comparable in cost to Adobe Photoshop: an educational
                subscription to Adobe’s Creative Cloud (which contains Photoshop) will run slightly
                less than $200. However, many universities offer the software for free on
                specialized library computers, and users can attain most of the functionality of
                Photoshop through the open-source GNU Image Manipulation Program. There are a couple
                of drawbacks to ultraviolet lighting: 1) Some archive-rich libraries, such as the
                New York Public Library and the British Library, neither allow users to take
                pictures with their own cameras (and a UV filter) nor are willing to supply these
                services themselves (though ordinary scanned images are available). 2) Ultraviolet
                light is not always the better solution. The following picture sequence (Figures
                1-3) compares the results of ultraviolet light with my methodologies. Figure 1 displays the original obliterated image, which
                is a passage from Frances Burney’s French journal held at the McGill University Rare
                Books Department. 
                    Rare Books and Special Collections, McGill University
                        Library
                    Original obliterated image from Frances Burney's French
                        journal
                    
                    
                
                Figure 2 shows the effects of an ultraviolet
                backlight, which definitely improves the readability, but the results of my
                methodology in Figure 3 confirm the difficult-to-read
                first word of the second line, d’entendre.
                The passage then becomes, J’ai bien peux imaginé en
                        demandeur d’entendre cette tragedie comment…
                ,  This is not grammatically correct French, which
                    should not be surprising since the point of Burney’s French notebooks is to
                    teach herself, under the guidance of her francophone husband, how to improve her
                    French. A corrected version of this phrase should read, J’ai bien pu imaginé un demandeur d’entendre cette
                        tragédie… which opens her description of a tragedy and
                its reception. 
                    Effects of an ultraviolent backlight
                    
                
                
                    Results of methodology
                    
                 My current research methodologies and approaches stem from my five years
                serving as a research assistant and later as the research coordinator of the Burney
                Centre at McGill University in Montreal. The Burney Centre contains the world’s
                largest holdings of material relating to the family of the major eighteenth-century
                novelist and diarist Frances Burney, which unites microfilm, photocopies, and
                scans of the major Burney collections at the Berg Collection in the New York Public
                Library, the British Library in London, and the Beinecke Library at Yale University,
                as well as important smaller and private holdings. The main goal of the Burney
                Centre is to prepare modern, complete, and unabridged scholarly editions of the
                journals and letters of Frances Burney and her father Charles Burney, author of the
                first history of music. More recently, the Centre has expanded its focus beyond the
                Burney family to include editions of other major eighteenth-century novelists. The
                Centre is a key site for the Cambridge Edition of the Works of Samuel Richardson
                project, with twenty-five projected volumes. Editions of Jane Austen’s juvenilia and
                manuscript writings with Cambridge University Press and Broadview Press (Canada)
                have also recently appeared through the Centre.
While at the Burney Centre, I developed a method that combines layering techniques,
                color levels, and filters and has proved highly effective for my research work on
                    The Court Journals and Letters of Frances Burney
                (Oxford University Press), The Additional Journals and Letters
                    of Frances Burney (Oxford University Press), and the Cambridge Edition
                of the Works of Samuel Richardson. The method is more advanced than simple image
                enlargement techniques used by most researchers. Importantly though, it remains far
                less expensive than multi-spectral imaging. First, it requires changing the color
                levels of a high-resolution photograph or scan in order to emphasize the contrast
                between obliteration marks and original text. The next steps involve adding new
                layers and carefully removing obliteration marks until the original text becomes
                visible by using a paint brush tool that is set to the background color. This method
                can also be used in conjunction with various filters that may sharpen or clarify
                some aspects of the image. I’ve illustrated the method in a corresponding series of
                images [Figures 4-16], which demonstrate the
                step-by-step process of recovering a word. Not all of the steps are obligatory, but
                the results are often improved after adjusting the Brightness/Contrast or Levels in
                the image [Figures 5-6] and using and often
                customizing the Sharpen filter [Figures 7-9]. Next, it
                is important to add a layer [Figure 10] to separate
                the researcher’s work from the original image, which allows for easy recovery of the
                original if a mistake is made during the process. The following steps are largely
                iterative, which involve using the paint tool to remove obliteration marks that are
                not definitively part of the original text [Figures
                    11-15]. Finally, the Brightness/Contrast or Levels can be adjusted once
                again [Figure 16] to make the recovery work blend into
                the original background.

                The Henry W. and Albert A. Berg Collection of English and American
                    Literature, The New York Public Library, Astor, Lenox and Tilden
                    Foundations
                
                
            

                
            

                
            

                
            

                
            

                
            

                
            

                
            

                
            

                
            

                
            

                
            

                
            
The technique contributed to the recovery of nearly all of the obliterated text in
                the first two volumes of The Court Journals and Letters of
                    Frances Burney, which were published by Oxford University Press in 2011.
                Unlike multi-spectral imaging, the use of image manipulation software is very
                cost-effective and thus applications in other textual projects, not just those
                related to the eighteenth century, are potentially wide-ranging.
I am currently using these methodologies for a project that focuses on the creative
                process of composition and the interactions between manuscript and print in the
                eighteenth century. The work on Frances Burney’s manuscripts that I have already
                undertaken at the Burney Centre in Montreal will provide the foundation for this
                project, which will employ and further develop my digital paleographical methodology
                using a new set of eighteenth-century manuscripts and will assess and analyze the
                insights it offers. The rest of this piece will demonstrate four applications of
                this method to important eighteenth-century manuscripts and discuss its potential
                for general use.
One of the earliest published examples of this technique appears in volume 1 of
                    The Court Journals and Letters of Frances Burney
                (2011). This volume, which spans July-December 1786, depicts the beginning of
                Frances Burney’s tenure as Keeper of the Robes at the court of Queen Charlotte.
                Burney frequently crossed out passages in her journals, especially those that she
                later deemed were too private for potential public consumption. The top image in
                    Figure 17 is a typical obliterated passage from
                Burney’s court years; the bottom image contains the same passage, but it has been
                modified using my digital paleography methodologies. In the altered image, we can
                detect the opening words The mourning. The next word will is more
                difficult, though the two l’s at the end make it possible to read. 3 weeks is
                clear as is I believe. The beginning of the second line is the most obscured:
                I determined that the first mark was a false start and read this as we were.
                already at Kew is fairly legible, and so is the final part, before the
                    Princess Amelia died, except perhaps for the last letters of before,
                though these can be safely guessed. When put together, the text reads, The
                    mourning will be but 3 weeks, I believe. We were already at Kew before the
                    Princess Amelia died. It is a significant passage, which reveals Burney’s
                response to the death of Princess Amelia, the second daughter of George II, on 31
                October 1786 . 
                    Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, Yale
                        University
                    
                    
                This is only one of several important recovered passages from Burney’s
                court journals. Some of the deleted material recovered using this technique
                confirmed Burney’s long-lasting depression from fall 1786, a medical condition
                suspected by her biographers, but never before confirmed in her correspondence.
This methodology has also been useful when applied to Burney’s novel manuscripts.
                There are surviving early manuscript drafts and later versions, including a proof
                copy, an interleaved copy, and some significant post-publication revisions, for her
                four novels, Evelina (1778), Cecilia (1782), Camilla (1796), and The Wanderer (1814). Eighteenth-century scholars have
                rarely been able to analyze fictional manuscripts because few novel manuscripts from
                the eighteenth-century survive as Burney’s do: it was common practice for printing
                houses to divide and destroy manuscripts during the publishing process. Extant
                manuscripts sometimes contain important authorial or editorial additions, pasted or
                sewn onto manuscript pages. This methodology can contribute to our understanding of
                Burney’s creative process of composition. In the early draft fragments that survive
                from her third novel Camilla, Burney changes the names
                of some of the characters. Burney’s most fascinating alteration can be seen in Figure 18, where Mr. Solmes is discovered to be
                a gender-bending replacement for Mrs. Arlbery.
                Mr. Solmes is undoubtedly a reference to the eponymous heroine’s distasteful
                and unyielding suitor in Samuel Richardson’s Clarissa
                (1747-8). Initially, this name change seems like a bizarre selection for the Mrs.
                    Arlbery figure, who is playful, sarcastic, and largely good intentioned. Yet
                the early version of Mrs. Arlbery tries to force Camilla into a mercenary marriage
                to a nobleman so that she can pay off her debts. She even tries to prevent Camilla
                from seeing her father in the last minutes before the marriage is solemnized. The
                name change to Mr. Solmes, then, is an apt choice for an advocate of a
                pressured, mercenary marriage. It reveals the significance of Clarissa as an intertext for Camilla, even
                though the storyline that contained Camilla’s failed aristocratic marriage was
                ultimately deleted from the novel. We can also see that Burney’s name and gender
                change of Mrs. Arlbery was half-hearted at best, since all of the pronouns linked to
                her character in the draft were left feminine.

                © The British Library Board, Egerton 3696 ff. 27-73
                
                
            
These digital methodologies, however, are not always successful. The primary limiting
                factors are 1) poor image quality and 2) extremely heavy deletions and manuscript
                deterioration. Unfortunately, researchers can rarely control either of these
                factors. It is usually impossible to reconstruct text where there are holes, gaps,
                and tears in the manuscript. Extremely heavy obliterations – where it is even
                difficult to determine the existence of letters with ascenders (b,
                d,
                h,
                k,
                l, and t), descenders (g,
                j,
                p,
                q, and y), or both ascenders and descenders (f and long
                    s) – can only be deciphered with the help of multi-spectral imaging or
                invasive chemical processes. Image quality can also be prohibitively low; few
                librarians allow image reproduction in excess of 300 dpi . It is also nearly impossible to retrieve
                high resolution and color scans from most microfilm versions, which are often used
                in lieu of the original manuscripts . Figure 19, which is taken from the correspondence
                between the eighteenth-century author Samuel Richardson and his admirer and friend
                Lady Dorothy Bradshaigh, illustrates the difficulties that arise with low image
                resolution and heavy deletions. The Richardson-Bradshaigh correspondence, which
                began with the latter’s anonymous homage to the former’s writings, is in general
                riddled with obliteration marks because their correspondence, which lasted from 1748
                until Richardson’s death in 1761, was prepared for public consumption, initially
                within Anna Laetitia Barbauld’s The Correspondence of Samuel
                    Richardson (1804). Most of the Richardson-Bradshaigh
                    correspondence is held in the Forster Collection . Places and names, such Lady Bradshaigh’s identity and the
                    low origins of her husband’s wealth (cannel coal pits at
                their estate in Haigh, Lancashire), are constantly obscured, but these can almost
                always be safely guessed. There are other extended deletions in the text, and
                because of the thick and heavy nature of the obliteration marks, many of these
                cannot be fully or even mostly deciphered, such as the example given in Figure 19.
                
                    The Victoria and Albert Museum
                    
                    
                 Certain phrases like generally speaking, which is located on line
                two of the obliteration, can be recovered with some careful work. Most of the
                passage, however, is undecipherable, which is also due to poor image quality. Even
                though Figure 19 has a resolution of 350 dpi, the
                dimensions for each .pdf file from the Richardson correspondence, which contains two
                sheets, is 8.263 inches by 11.694 inches (33.9 MB). This is in marked contrast to
                some of the other files, such as Figures 4-16, which
                originated as .tiff files with a resolution of 300 dpi and dimensions of 18.28
                inches by 21.313 inches (100.3 MB). The Burney sheets are nearly six times larger
                than the Richardson ones – 33.9 MB for two sheets of the Richardson vs. 100.3 MB for
                one sheet of the Burney – which accounts for the large discrepancy in image quality,
                and hence decipherability, between the two.
Above all, these digital methods have the potential to shape paleographical work
                beyond Frances Burney, Samuel Richardson, and the Burney Centre. I will close with a
                discussion of a poem by Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, an eighteenth-century author
                known primarily for her Turkish Embassy Letters
                (written 1716-18), which contain invaluable descriptions of eastern culture in the
                early eighteenth century. Lady Mary’s Wednesday: The Tête à
                    Tête from her Court Eclogues (1716), which
                exist in manuscript form and are written in the famous poet Alexander Pope’s hand,
                has a significant alternate ending. I am grateful to Cassie Childs, who is
                    working on an article-length study of this poem called Managing Poetic Space and Complicating Women’s Erotic Voices in Lady Mary
                        Wortley Montagu’s Wednesday: The Tête à
                        Tête, for bringing this to my attention . At the end of Wednesday, a pair of unidentified lovers is forced to part. The
                    final text is apparent in a digital photo of the
                manuscript, though obliteration marks can be clearly discerned Figure 20:

                The George Arents Collection, The New York Public Library, Astor, Lenox
                    and Tilden Foundations
                
                
            

                The dangerous Moments no Adieus afford, 
                Begone, she crys, I’m sure I hear my Lord. 
                The Lover starts from his unfinish’d Loves, 
                To snatch his Hat, and seek his scatter’d Gloves, 
                The sighing Dame to meet her Dear prepares; 
                While Strephon cursing slips down the back Stairs.
            
Lady Mary’s revised version is fascinating in light of the original text, which can
                be recovered after my technique has been applied in Figure
                    21:

                
            

                The dangerous Moments no replies afford,
                Begone, she crys, I’m sure I hear my Lord.
                The Lover starts from his unfinish’d joys,
                The Lady follows with a Look, and <cries>,
                O thoughtless Youth! what moments have <you mist>?
                <To leave but>; <xxxxx 1 word>;
                    <when you> should have
                    <kist>!
            
Manuscript symbols used here correspond with those used in modern editions of
                eighteenth-century journals and letters. <
                > indicate uncertain readings. <xxxxx> [4-6
                words] indicates material that has been crossed-out and not
                recovered, in this instance, 4-6 words. , 192 n.
                provides an earlier tentative reading of the final lines:
                    The Lady 〈?〉 with a 〈?Look〉, and cries,
                    Ah thoughtless Youth! what 〈moments〉 have you mist?
                    You have but 〈listen'd〉 when you should have kist!
                
There is a significant change in female agency between the early and the final
                version. While the final version emphasizes the male lover’s
                    curses because of his unfinish’d
                    Loves, the first ends with the lady’s direct speech, which emphasizes
                    her lost joys. Montagu’s removal of the female
                lover’s sexual agency before publication reveals the extent to which stringent
                eighteenth-century cultural norms may have influenced her creative process of
                composition.
These four examples from manuscripts by Frances Burney, Samuel Richardson, and Lady
                Wortley Montagu illustrate that this project could be of great interest to
                eighteenth-century manuscript and textual scholars, as it uses digital methodologies
                to elucidate manuscripts for editing projects, thus making such projects more
                accessible than ever before. Moreover, these techniques need not be limited to
                eighteenth-century manuscripts: as long as the images are presented in
                high-resolution and as long as the obliterations are neither too thick nor too
                heavy, the techniques have potentially wide applications. They provide, above all, a
                means of interacting with manuscripts through methodologies that, instead of
                opposing, incorporate the rise of digital texts and technologies.

                Acknowledgements
                I would like to thank my former colleagues at McGill University’s Burney Centre,
                    especially Peter Sabor and Stewart Cooke, for their assistance in the
                    development and implementation of these techniques. Matthew Grenby and Tom Mole
                    also provided valuable support in the articulation of this project. I am
                    grateful to the librarians and libraries that have provided the manuscripts that
                    are the focus of this article, including those at the Beinecke Library, British
                    Library, Victoria and Albert Museum, Lyndsi Barnes and Isaac Gewirtz at the New
                    York Public Library, and Ann Marie Holland and Jennifer Garland at McGill
                    Library’s Rare Books department.
            
