Title:  From the Presupposition of Doom to the Manifestation
               of Code: Using Emulated Citation in the Study of Games and Cultural Software
Volume:  015
Issue:  1
Date:  5 March 2021
Abstract:  
            
            For the field of game history to mature, and for game studies more broadly to
               function in a scholarly manner in the coming decades, one necessity will be
               improvement of game citation practices. Current practices have some obvious problems,
               such as a lack of standardization even within the same journal or book series. But a
               more pressing problem is disguised by the field’s youth: Common citation practices
               depend on the play experiences and cultural knowledge of a generation of game studies
               scholars and readers who are largely old enough to have lived through the eras they
               are discussing. More sustainable and precise alternatives cannot fall back on the
               tools available for fixed media — such as the direct quotations and page numbers used
               for books or the screenshots (of images that appear to all viewers) and timecode used
               for video. Instead, this essay imagines an alternative approach, working in the
               digital humanities traditions of speculative collections and tool-based
               argumentation. In the speculative future we present, there are scholarly collections
               of software, as well as tools available for citing software states and integrating
               these citations into scholarly arguments. A working prototype of such a tool is
               presented, together with examples of scholarly use and the results of an evaluation
               of the concept with game scholars.
         
Full Body Text: 

            1 The Changing Archive
            As many institutions contemplate migrating their software collections to digital
               repositories and expanding their born-digital holdings, scholars find new
               opportunities and use cases that leverage these records’ born-digital nature. At the
               same time, as recent surveys of the digital humanist landscape make abundantly clear,
               the future of historical scholarship will be tied to reconciling past, print-based,
               qualitative practices with newer, networked, quantitative ones 
               
               
               
               . The meaning of the historical archive is changing, and
               the ways to enable and maximize its exploration must also adapt.
            We provide in this article a way forward for the particular case of scholarship in
               video game history — by designing new means for historical citation, reference, and
               source retrieval. As we discuss below, these new means support a new approach to game
               scholarship (including, but not limited to, the history of games). Moreover, this new
               way of understanding game citation generalizes to other computational artifacts that
               will likely be of increasing concern to scholars, such as systems and application
               software, user interfaces, and more.
            Specifically, we outline the current practice and requirements of citation in
               historical game studies works and then suggest a route beyond that practice through
               the description of a tool for the reference and resurrection of game software data.
               This resurrection is used as a shorthand for the re-execution of legacy software data
               inside a new computational context.Resurrection could also apply to the
                  physical reconstruction (or acquisition) of legacy hardware. However, this article
                  is only able to comment on the data resurrection through emulation — for reasons
                  that will become clear below.
            
            Those investigating humanistic citation and authority in digital humanities, like
               Burdick et al. in Digital_Humanities, call out the
               coming dissolution of humanistic and preservationist foundations. 
            As concepts of authorship, document, argument, provenance, and reference become
               increasingly unstable, concepts that are fluid, iterative, and distributive, but less
                  authoritative, are taking their place .
            Game citation directly confronts — and calls for answers to — many of these
                  issues. That less authoritative records are taking
                     their place is actually more a symptom of not creating systems and
                     authoritative sources that can better deal with
                  new types of records, as we attempt to show through the citation system below and
                  have explored in our prior work on the appraisal of new forms of game development
                  documentation and new descriptive apparatus for game software objects. See Kaltman et la. (2014), Kaltman et al. (2016).  In this work, we highlight such problems
               of authorship, document, argument, provenance, and
                  reference.
            
            As a motivating example, consider the following text from Pinchbeck's detailed
               account of the 1993 computer game Doom: We make
                  extensive use of the computer game Doom, more
                  specifically the Doom Version 1.9 Shareware, because
                  it is freely distributable, a significant part of game history, and very well
                  documented compared to other historical computer games. 
               The color palette of browns and grays shouts a level of
                     realism that Wolfenstein 3D didn’t get anywhere
                     near. A barrel positioned temptingly in the center of the screen just aches to
                     be shot at and delivers a meaty crunching explosion that scatters debris across
                     the screen. . . . There are a number of linked secrets, establishing that
                     opening up new areas involves not just finding and triggering buttons and trip
                     wires but triggering things in sequence. In this case, we have a
                     different-colored wall panel, dropping down into a passage that takes us to the
                     lake of waste with the superarmor, then a trip wire in the final room that
                     lowers the Imp platform, announcing dynamic vertical-level adjustment and
                     opening up a little area with a shotgun and shells. . . . In the space of a few
                     short and small secrets, the game trains the observant player or completionist
                     to watch for wall discoloration, lines of light/shadow and new sectors as trip
                     wires, raising and dropping platforms, and linked sequences. This passage presupposes comparative
               knowledge of other early first-person shooters and assumes that the reader either
               accepts Pinchbeck's descriptions at face value or will do the legwork required to
               find a copy of the game, load it into emulation software (or find a computer capable
               of running it!), and reproduce Pinchbeck's referenced objects, sites, and narrative
               arc. This also puts a greater obstacle in the reader's path: Is the reader
               sufficiently dextrous and committed to complete the demo chapter and find the
               secrets? Whom does this type of citation include and exclude? Moreover, for game
               studies more broadly, it is time-consuming, tedious, and space-intensive to give
               detailed accounts of even a single linear playthrough of a game.
            Consider, as an alternative, this interactive, augmented version of a longer excerpt
               from the same passage, in which the highlighted text may be clicked to launch the
               game in a specific saved state. 
                  
                     
                         The color palette of browns and grays shouts a level of
                           realism that Wolfenstein 3D didn't get anywhere near. [Editorial note: This
                           first Wolfenstein 3D example unfortunately does not function on some
                           browsers.] A barrel positioned temptingly in the center of the screen just aches to be shot at and delivers a
                              meaty crunching explosion that scatters debris across the
                           screen...The lights vary in this room - we can see the light from the
                           large window to the right. When we pause by this window, the open areas seem huge, and we can
                              see a lake of animated green goo. A glowing piece of armor sitting
                           in the lake tells us straight away that we can leave the corridors and
                           rooms and actually get outside...We skirt around to the left toward the pillars (which are throbbing
                              and glowing with light) and head up the staircase to a plinth with
                              animated scrolling textures, to collect some armor. On the way, a shaven-headed goon with a shotgun bellows at us. We
                              fire, and he flies backward in a gush of blood, dropping the
                           shotgun. We collect it and scoop up some blue health vials and some archaic
                              metal helmets for an armor bonus, and we’re ready to go. 
                     
                     
                        Game Emulator
                     
                     
                        Toggle
                           audio
                        Example 1. This window
                           contains an active emulation context that runs the cited states
                           (clickable links) in the surrounding paragraphs. When you click on the
                           emulation, your mouse will be captured, use the "esc" key to release your
                           mouse. Controls for Doom and Wolfenstein 3D are as follows: Ctrl key to
                           shoot, arrow keys to move, numbers to change weapons, mouse to look (when
                           captured), "shift" key to run and "esc" key to bring up game menu.
                           Sometimes a state may load inconsistently, just click on the citation
                           again to reload it. A Doom state may hit an internal "LUMP" error, this
                           is due to internal consistency checking with the Doom engine. We
                           recommend using Google Chrome to run this page, if possible, as it
                           produced the fastest emulation speed in our tests.
                     
                     
                     
                         Other innovations introduced in the first level include
                           multiple vertical levels included in the same area. In the third room we enter, Imps stand on a raised platform in the
                              far corner, while Zombie soldiers advance along a walkway that zigzags
                              over green radioactive waste. There are a number of linked
                           secrets, establishing that opening up new areas involves not just finding
                           and triggering buttons and trip wires but triggering things in sequence.
                              In this case, we have a different-colored wall panel, dropping down
                              into a passage that takes us to the lake of waste with the
                              superarmor, then a trip wire in the final room that lowers the Imp platform, announcing dynamic vertical-level
                           adjustment and opening up a little area with a shotgun and shells. Finally, moving back out of this area and toward the second room opens a timed
                              lift in the corner of the secret shotgun area, which we can run back
                              to before it raises again (and it only does this once; some
                           secrets are nonrepeatable). The lift leads to a short corridor with a couple of small armor
                           bonuses before delivering the real reward, a one-way wall with a view over the walkway room. In the space of
                           a few short and small secrets, the game trains the observant player or
                           completionist to watch for wall discoloration, lines of light/shadow and
                           new sectors as trip wires, raising and dropping platforms, and linked
                           sequences. 
                     
                  
               
                It is worth
               noting that the shaven-headed goon referenced in the first quoted paragraph
               above only appears at this point at certain difficulty levels, so a player selecting
               easier difficulties will not encounter it. The previous citation, regarding the
                  plinth, is the same position in the level on an easier difficulty setting.
               Emulated citations in this paragraph therefore reflect more than just the level
               position and player state, but also macro-level changes to game settings. In
               addition, the citation referencing the timed lift in the corner
                  of the secret shotgun area loads with the game menu activated. This is due
               to the difficultly of catching the lift while simultaneously triggering a save state.
               If the menu is removed with the esc key, the lift will be shown rising up the
               wall. Therefore, there appears to be an art inherent to capturing evocative states
               that well-align with each descriptive sentence.
            In preparing this augmentation, the authors used a new browser-based tool — the Game
               and Interactive Software Scholarship Tool (GISST) — to play through the game, record
               our performance and bookmark specific instants, store these bookmarks in a database,
               and hyperlink the textual content to specific moments in that performance. A reader
               has only to load such a bookmark to witness the moment of the game we need for our
               argument; they may then continue to play or simply click the next bookmark. The
               searchable database of performances and game citations itself becomes fuel for future
               arguments and counterarguments, as scholars can start playing from any of these
               bookmarks and take different actions (or, indeed, can apply the same series of
               actions to a different version of the game): What if we had gone left instead of
                  right?
               How does this scene appear differently in the first alpha version versus the final
                  released version?
            
            Games and other interactive systems have dual lives: on the one hand, they are
               processes (often computer programs) which can generate sequences of emergent
               phenomena bounded only by combinatorics, with each additional choice or instant of
               time branching possible worlds by increasing exponents; on the other hand, every
               experience of a game is not a branching tree, but a linearized sequence of events and
               audiovisual outputs. Considering the game program as a text is not necessarily more
               or less correct than considering a specific play of a game as a text, and GISST
               illuminates the difference between game program and game performance which we explore
               later in this work. 
            As Stephen Ramsay and other digital humanists argue, computational tools can
               themselves be arguments for and about new humanistic expression  sentiment is echoed in convincing terms in the
               aforementioned polemic on the state of digital humanities . The authors assert that the next generation of digital
                  experimenters could contribute to humanities theory by forging tools that quite
                  literally embody humanities-centered views regarding the world
               . In this sense, the tool presented below is
               the embodiment of a potential future for the study of game history.
            In creating such a tool, we aim to foreground issues of reference as regards the
               notoriously unstable nature of computer games and software.See McDonough (2010); Newman (2012b). These objects, in their requirements for future
               retrieval and use in historical arguments, call for the ideation of what Bethany
               Nowviskie refers to as a speculative collections
               . These collections are those that do not yet exist,
               but will be required for future digital scholarship. The requirements of both game
               citation and the tool illustrated below invite the creation of a speculative future
               collection for managed and retrievable historical software data. Speculative
               collections call for the telegraphing of future scholarly use, and the creation of
               criteria for the descriptive, curative, and managerial requirements that would likely
               result. 
            The future of scholarship in game history is then not only based on the stabilization
               of records for future retrieval, but also in the ways that that retrieval is enacted
               in practice, and available for further exploration and exploitation by critical
               computational methods and tools. 
            We begin this article by identifying key problems in game and software citation. We
               explore these problems by applying theories of reduction and intertextuality. This
               leads us to new approaches for reference and from there to the design of GISST, the
               tool supporting the new kind of games scholarship illustrated above. Finally, we
               present a qualitative evaluation of GISST by other scholars.
            
               2 Citation
               Citation is a foundational act in modern scholarship. Regardless of the
                  discipline, any scholarly argument is based on, or a reaction to, previous work
                  and/or citable primary sources. Different fields use citation practice in
                  different ways, but the major functions remain consistent . 
               Citation operates on two fundamental levels. Within a text, it legitimates the
                  knowledge claims made by an author, and provides support for their arguments and
                  findings. It also, through the connections a citation makes to related works, ties
                  an author to the social organization of the discipline(s) to which they are
                  contributing. In fact, any discipline is essentially constituted by these networks
                  of citations, the collections of links that form being dense enough to support
                  further claims and disclaimers, rebuttals and denials. 
               Studies of citation occupy the thoughts of numerous fields, from the quantitative
                  analysis of bibliometrics, with its h-indexes and impact factors, to the applied
                  socio-linguistic study of discourse analysis. The dual roles of citation practice,
                  both in the form and content of knowledge links and as a base for social practices
                  within disciplines, are certainly ripe enough for a pluck into the basket of game
                  historical studies. Before diving into the morass of game citation, and even more
                  specifically, game data citation, the rest of this section will set up some
                  background definitions and support structures from citation-adjacent fields. These
                  will then be leveraged into a fuller discussion of game citation and the citation
                  tool as a speculation and intervention into future practice. 
               
                  2.1 Citation in Use
                  As discussed, citation functions both within a text, as a marker to other
                     sources, and without, as a tie between an author and a discipline. The
                     citations found inside texts follow the prescriptions of the common practices
                     within a field of study. Common guides for the humanities include the Modern
                     Language Association (MLA), American Library Association (ALA), and the
                     University of Chicago Manual of Style. Most engineering disciplines, including
                     Computer Science, follow similarly organized research guides. In CS’s case, a
                     majority of the works are organized around the conference guidelines provided
                     by the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) or the Institute of Electrical
                     and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). These guides are the products of the study of
                     bibliography, with its most prominent scholarly effect being the enumerative
                     bibliographies — the Works Cited lists — found after the conclusions of
                     monographs or conference publications. The constitution of bibliography entries
                     is the result of practices in descriptive bibliography, a subset of analytical
                     bibliography. 
                  While bibliographic practice in the age of the Internet is in some corners
                     lamented as both a lost art and potentially unnecessary , we believe that coherent, consistent and standardized
                     bibliographic description is still essential.Additionally, the practices
                        of analytical bibliography — probably most impressively displayed in Frank
                        Manchel’s magnum opus, Film Study: An Analytical
                           Bibliography — can help to reconcile the production and history
                        of academic disciplines . Manchel’s four-volume,
                        2500 page work enumerates and describes the entire breadth of English
                        language film and film studies produced between 1965 and 1990.
                        Interestingly, in line with the current project of scholarly support through
                        tools, Manchel’s work is emphatically indebted to SCRIPT/VS word processing
                        system and the IBM 6670 Laser Printer for help in maintaining and organizing
                        the necessary subject and author indexes required for his work . The practice of organized
                     analysis of the works in a field can help to reveal new research directions and
                     provide a solid base for future claims. Game historical work needs more time
                     and effort devoted to these foundational, field-constitutive activities. 
                  Returning to in-text bibliographic citation practices, we find that an explicit
                     function of citation is the legitimation of claims.In the most recent MLA
                        Handbook, the editors write that citation practice involves, demonstrating the thoroughness of the writer’s research,
                           giving credit to the original sources, and ensuring that readers can find
                           the [sources] . . . to draw their own conclusions about the writer’s
                           argument
                        . Additionally, authors must provide a
                           comprehensible, verifiable means of referring to one
                           another’s work . . . to give credit to the precursors whose ideas they
                           borrow, build on or contradict and allow future researchers interested in
                           the history of the conversation to trace it back to the beginning
                        . Authors need to legitimate their
                     claims, both by crediting original sources and supporting dialogue with other
                     scholars with whom they may agree or disagree. Citation also works as a means
                     to pay an intellectual debt, as any addition to knowledge, being based on
                     previous efforts, should acknowledge others’ contributions . 
                  In history specifically, the formation of modern historical discourse is
                     founded on the scientific practice of accurate historical sourcing.
                     Commonly attributed to Leopold Von Ranke and his continental predecessors, the
                     development of footnote and endnote showed that the author had done an acceptable amount of work, enough to lie within the
                        tolerances of the field
                     . Citation persuades others to pay
                     attention to a scholar’s work and thoughts. It cannot explain the precise course taken by a historian, but can give the reader . . . enough hints to make it possible to work
                        this out — in part. No other apparatus can give more information — or more
                        assurance — than this
                     . Anthony Grafton, in reference to the
                     preceding quotes, notes that the function of footnotes — the historian’s
                     preferred mode of citation — is to give legitimacy to a claim and promote the
                     authority of the claimant. Footnotes also provide means for enforcing the
                     social space of historians through the inclusion or exclusion of particular
                     works. In many cases, a notable omission provides for a deeper criticism than
                     an antithetical reference, because at least the latter claim is being
                     recognized and confronted instead of ignored. 
               
               
                  2.2 Citation as Discourse
                  Given that this article is devoted to the use and abuse of citation practices
                     in game historical texts, we need to develop a suitable framing and terminology
                     to discuss game citations. As alluded to above, the act of citation involves
                     the coherent and consistent description of a source within a text. This is
                     usually in the form of a bibliographic footnote or endnote, or as a list of
                     entries (enumeration) following a text. Bibliography dictates that there is
                     sufficient description to allow a future researcher to recover the described
                     source. This creation of a knowledge link to another’s work, in light of
                     bibliographic practice, is then a matter of practicality. One needs adequate
                     description for future retrieval. What bibliographic notions do not cover is
                     the use of a citation, a knowledge linkage, within the text itself. The correct
                     form of a description for a source is not the same as how an author activates
                     that source inside their text as a part of their argument. We then have to
                     split the act of citation in two. The first part is simply the
                     description and positioning of a citation inside a text, and the other is an
                     analysis of how that citation is used as a way to further the objectives of an
                     author, and by extension that author’s discipline. Fortunately, the discussion
                     of citation’s effect on both textual composition and the social formation of
                     disciplines is addressed in the fields of bibliometrics and discourse studies.
                     In the following paragraphs we will borrow a few key disciplinary concepts,
                     then position them in relation to practices in game historical scholarship.
                  The intersection of one text within another is an instance of intertextuality.
                     Although the term intertextuality is used in a number of fields, our
                     definition of it here is drawn from discourse studies. One of the founders of
                     the field, Norman Fairclough, describes intertextuality as the property texts have of being full of snatches of other texts, which may
                        be explicitly demarcated or merged in, and which may assimilate, contradict,
                        ironically echo, and so forth
                     . Intertextuality, in Fairclough’s
                     consideration, implicitly calls to account the production, distribution, and
                     consumption of texts. For production, a key consideration is the
                        historicity of texts, how they add to previous knowledge and expand a
                     specific discursive chain of thought.Discursive
                           chain of thought is basically the organization of knowledge in a
                        specific discipline. All practitioners are contributing to the historical
                        accumulation that furthers the course of their discipline and the history of
                        its claims. Distribution reflects on the network of texts and how
                     they transform and flow into different types and fields.There are
                        parallels here with Latour and the translation of concepts in networks, as
                        well as the use of inscription in the creation of research works. We will
                        briefly bring in some of the history of science and technology perspective
                        on text formation, with its focus on practice, below. Fairclough uses
                     the example of political speeches transformed into news reports. With
                     consumption, the intertextual perspective is helpful in
                        stressing that it is not just the text, not indeed just the texts
                        that intertextually constitute it, that shape interpretation, but also those
                        other texts which interpreters variably bring to the interpretation
                        process
                     . All three implications of
                     Fairclough’s intertextual perspective have a
                     significant bearing on the interpretation of citation and reference in academic
                     works. That texts are engaged with a disciplinary train of thought, flow and
                     re-form based on context, and intimately involve presuppositions about the
                     other texts they do (and could) use, are all points of reflection for both the
                     citation practice of games, and the implications for a better use of the tool
                     proposed below; it being a means of a new type of intertextual link for game
                     history. 
                  Fairclough’s intertextuality is drawn from a more elaborate framework based in
                     French discourse analysis that traces back to Michel Foucault’s Archaeology of Knowledge. Rather than retrace this
                     history ourselves, we can lean on Fairclough’s two notions of intertextuality,
                     manifest and constitutive. Manifest intertextuality is where specific other texts are overtly drawn upon within a text,
                     forming a heterogeneous constitution of texts. To
                     clarify, the quote ending the previous sentence is an example of manifestation,
                     as is Fairclough’s intertextuality at the
                     beginning of the paragraph. Both are specific, overt calls out to other texts,
                     with the direct quote being a more emphatic kind of manifestation. Constitutive
                     intertextuality (for Fairclough interdiscursivity)
                     is effectively the means of intertextuality for a specific text. How the
                     configuration of its references, allusions, and implications for other texts,
                     both explicitly mentioned and implicitly demanded, align to form a specific
                     type of discourse for a specific audience.We are careful to note that the
                        assumption of an audience here is not only referring to the actions taken by
                        an author, with an audience in mind, to clarify and align their text with
                        others’ expectations, but also to the implicit knowledge that a potential
                        reader will bring to a text given that it is in a specific discursive form.
                        Fairclough goes into more depth on discursive types in Fairclough (1992), specifically in
                        chapters 2 and 3. Bibliographic actions — like enumerative
                     bibliography, footnotes, and in-line citations — are then all types of
                     manifestation while the act of citation itself, as a social and knowledge
                     linking activity, is a constitutive act. 
                  Before extending the application of constitutive and manifest intertextuality
                     to game historical discourse, two more key insights from Fairclough are useful.
                     The first is the idea of a presupposition of a text. Sometimes
                     presuppositions are just propositions that are given for,
                        and taken for granted by, text producers. When engaged in the act of
                     writing and assembling an argument, authors bring into their writing numerous
                     pointers to other works — through manifestation — or ideas from other works
                     that are assumed to be part of the general knowledge of an assumed reader. Or,
                     crucially, part of the knowledge that one is assumed to take from an other
                        text that is insinuated in the current one. In many
                        cases of presupposition the other text is not an individual specified
                        or identifiable other text, but a more nebulous text corresponding to
                        general opinion (what people tend to say, accumulated textual
                        experience)
                     . A presupposition, through manifest
                     citation, of a particular other author or other work, brings with
                     it a host of assumptions based on an expected experience on the part of the
                     reader. As a result, presuppositions are difficult to correct if they go awry
                     because both the reader and the author are under a similar delusion about the
                     content and shape of a reference. 
                  This gap between presuppositions, as intended by an author and interpreted by a
                     reader, leads us to a second point about ambiguity and the constitutive
                        surface of a text. In drawing together the heterogeneous network of
                     texts that constitute a new one, there are times when certain parts may not fit
                     as well as others. Texts vary a great deal in their
                           degrees of heterogeneity . . . [they] also differ in the extent to which
                           their heterogeneous elements are integrated, and so in the extent to
                           which their heterogeneity is evident on the surface of the text. . . .
                           Again, texts may or may not be reaccentuated; they may or may not
                           be drawn into the prevailing key or tone (e.g., ironic or sentimental) of
                           the surrounding text. Or again, the texts of others may or may not be
                           merged into unattributed background assumptions of the text being
                           presupposed. So a heterogeneous text may have an uneven and bumpy
                           textual surface, or a relatively smooth one.
                         That we should pay attention
                     to qualities of a textual surface — and the ways in which its imbricated texts
                     do and do not comport with each other — motivates our framing for the
                     discussion of the citation work below. If we are combining references in text
                     to games, and other systems, based on non-discursive experiences, their
                     constitutive intertextuality needs to be examined, along with its effects on
                     the resulting historical discourse.The organization of citations in a
                        text (and, in our case, the organization of text and running executable
                        programs) does also call out to various traditions relating to visual design
                        and the juxtaposition of text and image, specifically in art criticism see
                           Berger (1973). We may want the
                     alignment to have a specific texture, but we also need to be aware that that
                     texture, that surface, is something deserving of reflective consideration and
                     thought. How do the citation of games and the juxtaposition of program and text
                     affect the reader’s experience and comprehension of the argument? What does
                     this do to the issues of presupposition and scholarly assumption? Below we
                     discuss the current practice of game citation in light of both manifest
                     intertextuality and presupposition. 
                  One last implication of the heterogeneous constitution of texts is that it
                     results in what Fairclough refers to as an ambivalence of argumentative
                     meaning. If the surface of a text may be multiply
                        determined by the various other texts which go into its composition, then
                        elements of that textual surface may not be clearly placed in relation to
                        the text’s intertextual network, and their meaning may be ambivalent;
                        different meanings may coexist, and it may not be possible to determine
                           the meaning
                     . The ambiguity inherent to any
                     textual argument results from the fact that we — as the authors — are removing
                     other texts from their original context and constituting them into our own. As
                     such, the onus is on us, the researchers, to both explain and refine the
                        other texts in a way that supports our argument and that is
                     interpretable to the reader. Poking below the surface of the text and
                     retrieving a shared context requires significant effort, and in the case of
                     games, might not currently be possible due to a lack of access 
                     .
               
            
            
               3 Bibliography and Citation in Game Studies
               In the previous section we outlined the function of citation as both an act of
                  descriptive bibliography and as an intertextual mechanism in the creation of
                  textual discourse. This section brings both of those concepts to bear on the
                  current practices of game citation in game studies and game historical texts.
                  While both fields are large, with a significant amount of publication activity,
                  the extent of game citation is currently rather limited. Additionally, in game
                  studies works there is a good deal of presupposition about the accumulated played
                  experiences of both the reader and author. These assumptions are a major reason
                  for the current lack of specific bibliographic guidelines. As Nathan Altice
                  writes, in one of the only other analyses of game citation practice, Our familiarity with and access to videogames is taken for
                        granted, since many of us are old enough to recall first-hand experience
                        with the entire history of videogames — a claim that cannot be made by
                        scholars of other media. There is an implicit assumption that we all know
                        what a Super Mario Bros. cartridge looks like,
                        so why bother with thorough descriptions?
                     Altice 2015, 334]
               This implicit assumption of Super Mario Bros. is the result of the presupposition at work in game
                  studies texts. It is not uncommon for game references to be scant or potentially
                  non-existent. This is a problem because the assumption of contemporary, tacit
                  experience with historical games cannot hold up past the current generation of
                  scholars. Game citation practices, like those of appraisal and description, need
                  to be addressed with a mind toward future historical scholarship and needs. The
                  rest of this section will describe how citation functions in game studies works,
                  and briefly point to further recommendations for their improvement. All of this
                  lays groundwork for the introduction of the citation tool in the next section — as
                  a tool-assisted intervention into both the issues of citation standardization and
                  presupposition of game play experiences.
               As already noted, computer game bibliography and citation practice needs
                  consistent and thorough standards. Again, from Altice, To
                        claim that videogame bibliography demands a closer allegiance to the
                        practices [of enumerative, and analytical bibliography] assumes that a
                        unified practice called videogame bibliography even exists. At their
                        best, videogame citations adhere to the barest enumerative models. Even in
                        those texts that most seriously grapple with electronic artifacts as objects
                        that exhibit physical properties worthy of description, such as
                        Kirschenbaum’s Mechanisms or Montfort and
                        Bogost’s Racing the Beam, videogames are still
                        afforded scant bibliographic information.
                      Altice’s claim of the lack of a
                     videogame bibliography practice is not difficult to substantiate. As he
                  states, many works that are intimately tied to the exploration of the material
                  constraints and expressive potentials of technical artifacts do not share
                  consistent bibliographic practices. Both works mentioned above, Matt
                  Kirschenbaum’s Mechanisms — a treatise on the
                  oft-overlooked ambiguities in the expression of digital data — and Ian Bogost and
                  Nick Montfort’s Racing the Beam — a platform study
                  into the inner workings of the Atari 2600 — come from the same publisher, are
                  intimately involved with the technical distinctions of computer software, and do
                  not share a consistent practice in their bibliographies 
                  . 
               
                  Racing the Beam is a part of a larger series of works
                  on specific platforms. Each book investigates the constraints that a particular
                  platform imposes on the expressive potential of its software. Each book also takes
                  a different position on the placement, organization and depth of its enumerative
                  bibliography of games. Some volumes, like Jimmy Maher’s on the Commodore Amiga,
                  eschew any explicit listing of the games referenced in the text . Contrarily, works like Altice’s own I AM ERROR, on the Nintendo Entertainment System, adopt meticulous,
                  platform- and media format-specific reference schemes. 
               Now, given that there is a not a standard set of bibliographic and citation
                  practices for software, and that most major sources of such practices — like the
                  MLA, University of Chicago, and surprisingly even the ACM — lack any guidelines
                  for software bibliography, it is perhaps not unexpected that academic book
                  publishers and authors do not maintain consistent practices.The ACM is
                     currently investigating ways to embed software references into publications
                     through an artifact review badging process. See:
                        https://www.acm.org/publications/policies/artifact-review-badging
                  The work of the Game Metadata and Citation Project (GAMECIP), which looked at
                  hundreds of game studies citations across a variety of online and print sources,
                  also validates Altice’s (and our) assumption about the lack of consistent
                  practice. In fact, even within the same journal, Game
                     Studies, which does have an explicit bibliographic policy, there was
                  still lax enforcement of descriptive citation practice.
                     http://gamestudies.org/1802/submission_guidelines#GSCitation
               
               Altice also links bibliography and citation to descriptive concerns. He notes,
                        As a Famicom scholar, I may possess the terminology
                        to describe that platform’s media but meanwhile lack the platform-specific
                        knowledge to properly cite a PlayStation 2 game. . . . Granting each
                        [reference] its due description poses a sizable research challenge. One
                        solution is to build up a body of platform-specific descriptions that others
                        may use as a model . . . but such shared knowledge will take time and
                        work.
                      Computer game bibliography is
                  distinct from that for other media forms mainly in the complex of technical
                  requirements needed to retrieve the object. GAMECIP’s platform and format
                  vocabularies, outlined in prior work , speak to
                  Altice’s call in a limited way by attempting to codify and standardize some basic
                  descriptive information for computer games. The larger issue, however, is that
                     rich bibliographic records require a baseline technical
                     understanding of the objects they describe
                  .
               For game scholars concerned with the technical underpinnings and object
                  materiality of software, each new platform, format, and data configuration incurs
                  a significant descriptive cost. For items in Altice’s enumerative bibliography,
                  each specific game is listed according, in part, to the configuration of
                  components inside a Nintendo Entertainment System Game Pak, and in the case of
                  emulated sources, the header information of a particular game data file. Clearly,
                  for his arguments to validate, this level of depth is necessary, and it would
                  benefit future scholarship if others could take advantage of his classification
                  schemes or even extend them into their own specific sub-domain of software. 
               Altice and others in the platform studies community are more concerned with the
                  material and technical conditions of games than other historical scholars. What
                  works for platform studies might be overkill for other subdisciplines. However, at
                  the very least, the technical information provided in a bibliography should be
                  correct, and involve a level of detail specific enough to allow an unacquainted
                  reader a fair chance to recover the source.This is in line with the
                     recommendation for reasonable compatibility in
                        Kaltman et al. (2015). We argue that a game
                     resource in a collection catalog should provide granular enough information to
                     give a researcher a reasonable guess at the technical apparatus required for
                     the resource’s recovery. The lack of consistency in the description of
                  computer game sources can damage the legitimacy of game historical arguments. As
                  mentioned in the last section, one key way that a citation can fail is through a
                  mistaken presupposition about the source it is referencing. This misalignment
                  between the author’s expectation — or recollection — of a game play experience and
                  that of a future reader’s is only exacerbated by incomplete and inconsistent
                  citation practice. 
               
                  3.1 Presupposition of DOOM!
                  One significant difficulty in game citation is that games are not as
                     recoverable as other media forms. Many institutions do not have software
                     collections, and those that do struggle against the technical and material
                     constraints of hardware maintenance and access. When these limited access
                     scenarios collide with a lack of rigor in citation practice, the result is that
                     many outputs of game scholarship rely on only the barest descriptions for
                     games. They are used more as pointers to the concept of a particular game, as
                     presupposition, than to an emphatic, playable instance of one. 
                  To take a particularly salient example, let us return to Dan Pinchbeck’s book
                        DOOM: SCARYDARKFAST. This book — a good example
                     of design-focused phenomenological game study — relies, almost exclusively, on
                     presupposition of game citations. The work contains manifest citations, mostly
                     through in-line references, to 130 other computer games. Most are used in
                     passing to articulate how a particular structural, thematic, or kinesthetic
                     element from each game relates to those of Doom.
                     The in-line references are of the form (Title, Year), leaving the reader to
                     fill in the blanks based on their assumed knowledge of each title. Furthermore,
                     given the breadth of games mentioned, it is likely that nearly all readers have
                     not played, or at least not recently played, many of them. The references hang
                     on a presupposition of past experiences with the titles, and hopefully they
                     still resonate in ways commensurate with his arguments. The references are, as
                     we mentioned above, presupposed shorthand for the shared played experience of
                     both author and reader.
                  To illustrate how this form of manifest, presupposed citation functions, take
                     this set of paragraphs describing the progress of the first-person perspective
                     from Pinchbeck’s book: We need to consider the
                              context into which DOOM arrived. The very
                              first FPS game was Maze War, created by
                              Steve Colley, Howard Palmer, and Greg Thompson (and other
                              contributors) at the NASA Ames Research Center. Colley estimates that
                              the first version was built during 1973, as an extension of the
                              earlier game Maze, which offered a
                              first-person exploration of a basic wireframe environment. At some
                              point during ’73 or ’74, networked capability was added, enabling
                              multiplayer FPS play. The genre was born out of networked
                              deathmatching. After Thompson moved to MIT, he continued to develop
                                 Maze War, adding a server offering
                              personalized games, increasing the number of players to eight, and
                              adding simple bots to the mix. Twenty years before DOOM, all of the prototypical features of the
                              FPS were in place: a 3D real-time environment, simple ludic activity
                              (look, move, shoot, take damage), and a basic set of goals and
                              win/lose conditions — all this and multiplayer networked combat. 
                           Around the same time, Jim Bowery developed Spasim (1974), which he has claimed to be the very first
                              3D networked multiplayer game. Spasim
                              pitted up to thirty-two players (eight players in four planetary
                              systems) against one another over a network, with each taking control
                              of a spaceship, viewed to other players as a wireframe. A second
                              version expanded the gameplay from simple combat to include resource
                              management and more strategic elements. Whether or not Bowery’s
                              argument that Spasim precurses Maze War and represents the first FPS holds
                              water, its importance as a game is undiminished — even if for no other
                              reason than because Spasim is a clear
                              spiritual ancestor of Elite (Braben and
                              Bell 1984) and its many derivatives. It perhaps even prototypes a game
                              concept that would later spin out into combat-oriented real-time
                              strategy (RTS) or even massively multiplayer online (MMO) gaming. 
                           What certainly differentiates Spasim from
                                 Maze War is the perspective. Like
                              other early first-person games, such as BattleZone (Atari 1980) and id’s Hovertank 3D (1991), the game is essentially vehicular,
                              with no representation of the avatar onscreen other than a crosshair.
                              It is interesting that, aside from occasional titles such as Descent (Parallax 1995) and Forsaken (Probe Entertainment 1998), the
                              genre very swiftly settled down into the avatar-based perspective,
                              abandoning vehicular combat more or less completely. It’s also
                              interesting that contemporary shooters often opt for a shift to
                              third-person when including vehicles, such as with Halo: Combat Evolved (Bungie 2002) or Rage (id Software 2011). Half-Life 2’s (Valve Software 2004) first-person car
                              sequences are actually quite unusual.
                         These three paragraphs
                     reference twelve games spanning a period from 1974 to 2011. Doom does not receive a full in-line citation since it
                     is the topic of the book, and is addressed with in-line references in a
                     previous section. Ignoring the general argument and focusing only on the
                     citations and their relationship to the assertions being made on their behalf,
                     we already encounter some significant issues. 
                  Firstly, the citations are not particularly specific. Descent, for example, was released in six different versions for
                     three different platforms in three different localities in 1995 alone.
                        According to MobyGames, https://web.archive.org/web/20160421081803/http://www.mobygames.com/game/descent/release-info,
                        Descent has 15 different releases, 6 of which occurred in 1995 in the United
                        States, Japan, and Germany for DOS, Mac, and PC-98. The description
                        (Descent, 1995) then does not provide enough
                     information for a reasonable assumption about the particular version Pinchbeck
                     played (or presupposed). Second, the citations presuppose a significant amount
                     of knowledge on the part of the reader. When Pinchbeck remarks, Spasim is a clear spiritual
                        ancestor of Elite . . . and its many
                        derivatives, we (the reader) are required to understand — through
                     presupposition — that Spasim, a first-person,
                     cockpit oriented space exploration game is echoed in Elite, a similarly-perspectived first-person space simulation game.
                     Clearly, that assertion requires a familiarity with both games, and by
                     extension knowledge of other Elite derivatives.
                     Finally, even though a game might be recoverable through the sparse citation
                     provided, much of the discussion still presupposes memories of experiences of
                     play, both in Pinchbeck and in his readers. By referencing the vehicular
                     segment of Half-Life 2, Pinchbeck is implicitly
                     requiring a future researcher, should they want to experience that sequence, to
                     spend many hours of game time reaching and evaluating it. There is nothing
                     inherently wrong with this, but we must highlight the extent of the assumptions
                     being made of the reader. Either you already have contemporary experience of
                        Half- Life 2, and incidentally remember this
                     game play sequence, or you are relying on Pinchbeck’s memory of his
                     contemporary play. Both positions presuppose a temporally-situated accumulation
                     of played experiences that aligns with the year of this work’s publication.
                     Future researchers, removed from a contemporary, played understanding of the
                     game, must assume that Pinchbeck is not committing any of the intertextual
                     no-nos — like misinterpretation or incorrect presupposition — listed in the
                     previous section. Otherwise, they will need to recover Half-Life 2 for themselves, and assume that their version contains
                     the vehicular sequence in question and that it is reachable through play. 
                  While it may seem that we are being a bit drastic in this example, we cannot
                     take for granted that our own presuppositions about Half-Life 2 or any other game discussed in the quote above (or, for
                     that matter, in this text) will align with the presuppositions of future
                     scholars. 
                  Pinchbeck’s references are intended to evoke a general idea of a specific
                     title, relying primarily on the presupposition of reader knowledge. The
                     referenced games in these cases stand in metonym for their specific
                     constitutive function in the text. Halo, Rage, and Half-Life 2 for
                     their comparative vehicular segments; Spasim,
                        Elite, Descent,
                     and Forsaken for their 360-degree cockpit
                     viewpoint; and HoverTank 3D, BattleZone, Maze, and Maze
                        War for their advances to first person representation. Concrete,
                     retrievable instances of these games are secondary to the structural or
                     thematic conceptualizations of them as presupposed into Pinchbeck’s argument. 
                  In contrast, recalling Altice’s more extensive, object-based citations, we see
                     that many of his claims are rooted in the minutiae of a single platform and its
                     technical constraints. For Altice, his argument is dependent on the specifics,
                     on the material differences between games rather than the higher level concepts
                     they can evoke. He commonly uses emulated versions of games to illustrate
                     points about Nintendo Entertainment System rendering techniques. Because
                     rendering functions differ between the many versions of, say, Super Mario Bros., Altice’s citation of a specific
                     version of the game’s data is important: his analysis would not be possible —
                     or legitimate — without it. 
                  The lesson is not that anything Pinchbeck is saying is particularly incorrect,
                     but that the onus for clarification is heavily weighted toward the reader, and
                     in particular, a presupposition about the reader’s accumulated knowledge of
                     games. Pinchbeck’s work is intended for a game savvy audience, and is certainly
                     not attempting to be a rigorous, formal history of Doom.Relevantly, Pinchbeck was involved with the KEEP
                        project, an early attempt to provide an emulation framework for the recovery
                        of older games P. A specific purpose of KEEP
                        was to insure that people could play old games to explicitly understand
                        their affordances through play and reference their historical context. As
                        such, we wish to reiterate that Pinchbeck’s work is used as an example of a
                        specific type of game historical discourse and not a criticism of the work
                        itself. But the type of underspecified, game-as-shorthand reference
                     structure is endemic to a significant swath of game studies. It will also make
                     these types of work less relevant the farther they are displaced from the
                     contemporary titles to which they refer. Again, in clarification with Altice,
                        Most contemporary game scholars are old enough to
                        remember most of the entire historical arc of computer games, so further
                        clarification for them, and audiences like them are not currently
                        required. Those in the future, unversed in the early history of
                     computer games, will need to do a significant amount of work to recover all of
                     the implicit game history embedded within Pinchbeck’s references. 
                  Another note is that Pinchbeck’s citations are more the norm in current game
                     citation practice. The GAMECIP study of citation practice analyzed citations in
                     over 300 publications relating to computer games. Of those, 102 different
                     styles of citation were found, and of those only 31 included any information
                     about game platforms. A majority simply focused on title, developer and year of
                     publication. The main problem with this lax citation practice is that without
                     at least a foundational set of descriptive elements tied to some expression of
                     technical constraints and requirements, locating and replaying games referenced
                     in scholarly works might be very difficult in the far future.For more
                        information on recommendations for citation guidelines as a result of the
                        GAMECIP work, please refer to our citation recommendations: Kaltman, Eric,
                        Stacey Mason, and Noah Wardrip-Fruin. The Game I Mean:
                           Game Reference, Citation and Authoritative Access
                        . Additionally, recent citation recommendations
                        and a discussion of how citation of games is always a political and
                        discipline-specific act can be found in How to
                           Reference a Digital Game
                        . Altice’s end of the spectrum, with its
                     acknowledgment of computer game materiality grounding out into the literal byte
                     order of a file header, is more historically secure in theory but requires a
                     level of technical understanding that might turn off scholars with less
                     techno-materialist concerns. 
                  In the end, a probable solution is to provide a minimally viable set of
                     descriptive bibliographic fields based, again, on assumptions of reasonable
                     compatibility and retrieval. These minimum specifications and recommendations
                     for citation practice can be found in forthcoming work from the GAMECIP
                     project. The main thrust, however, is that for the legitimation of any argument
                     made about or through a game, there is a requisite depth of citation that
                     aligns with the claim. From the above, the depth of Pinchbeck’s arguments dealt
                     with apparent surface characteristics of games — characteristics that would
                     hopefully be apparent to anyone playing one of the games cited. In the case of
                     platform studies arguments, the claims are dependent on citation at a different
                     depth, one close to the actual material existence of the program. 
                  Hopefully, this section illuminated some of the problems with current manifest
                     intertextuality in games, most specifically that, due to the current
                     limitations of textual description, the field of game studies is dependent on a
                     presupposition of played knowledge that is not tied to any specific material
                     instances of games. The next section looks at this problem from the perspective
                     of constitutive intertextual relations and provides a basis for our partial
                     solution in the form of a citation tool for executable reference. This
                     constitutive work is the result of confronting the current limitations of
                     citations as they have been described so far. Primarily, when even the citation
                     of specific, material data is not enough or of a kind with the expression of
                     new historical claims.
               
            
            
               4 Reduction and Intertextual Expression
               Intertextuality is a fickle phenomenon. As noted by Fairclough above, when making
                  one text manifest within another, work needs to be done to mold the “other text”
                  in a form commensurate with the discourse surrounding it. Otherwise the textual
                  surface is disturbed, and the flow of thought for the reader becomes more
                  difficult to reconcile and interpret. (Of course in some instances, this might be
                  desired as a way to remark on the disjunction between different textual forms and
                  different ways of reading.) Fairclough looks at newspapers, medical interviews,
                  and other forms of discourse dissimilar from the academic text within which he is
                  operating. He focuses on the ways in which each discourse’s intertextuality
                  contributes to its existence as a distinct genre, a distinct type of expression.
                  This notion of constitutive intertextuality, the ways in which different
                  discourses make use of and interact with other texts, is a fundamental aspect of
                  discourse analysis. The constitutive act of bringing together other texts
                  through manifest actions like citation, as noted by Ken Hyland in his study of
                  academic citation practice, links text users to a network
                        of prior texts depending on their group membership, and provides a system of
                        coding options for making meanings. Because they help to instantiate or
                        construe the meaning potential of a disciplinary culture, the conventions
                        developed in this way foreclose certain options and make some predictions
                        about meanings possible.
                     
               
               The organization of disciplines and regions of thought and inquiry, both in the
                  humanities and the sciences, are then dictated through the intertextual relations
                  of publications. These publications organize into networks that then enforce and
                  negotiate the boundaries of disciplines, and the specific intertextual discourse
                  required for group allegiance. We argue that the intertextual surfaces of these
                  genres of discipline make use of certain conventions that can preclude certain
                  types of meaning and the expression of certain types of thoughts. 
               By relying on standard conventions of manifest intertextuality, and therefore
                  prescribing limitations on the expression of academic claims, we are preventing
                  certain discussions from taking place. In the interest of this article, we are
                  most concerned with the explanation and historical positioning of computer games
                  as systems and technical objects. We remarked in the previous section that
                  references stand in metonym for more complex thematic components and system
                  interactions. In a sense, the discussion was really about the limitations of
                  current textual discourse about games — discourse that relies on the
                  narrativization of game play or the accumulated knowledge of the reader as player.
                  That game academics use text as the major form of expression is understandable.
                  Michael Lynch, when discussing scientists’ use of text over visuals, notes:
                        The fact that writing is the dominant medium of
                        academic discourse is not incidental; while pictorial subject matter is
                        alien to written discourse, and requires a reduction to make it amenable to
                        analysis, written subject matter can be iterated without any gap with
                        the textual surface that analyzes it.
                     
               
               Games are even more removed from the textual surface than the visualizations Lynch
                  is investigating. Their insertion into textual discourse filters through many
                  different levels of reduction. Lynch’s argument
                  focuses on the reduction of the worked scientific reality of the life sciences to
                  the written page. Scientific research teams are described as
                     agencies of mediation between an uncertain and chaotic research domain and the
                     schematic and simplified products of research that appear in
                     publications
                  . Researchers select and distill the
                  appropriate data and reduce it to visualizations and textual description to align
                  with the constraints of printed publications. This reduction of the chaos of a
                  research project to the streamlined and validated prose of research publications
                  is of a kind with the work of some game historical scholars in their attempts to
                  better mind the gap between the played expression of games and their
                  appearance and function in text-based academic arguments. Most of the time, game
                  studies uses presupposition as a form of reduction, a way to fit the complex
                  system interactions inherent to the experience of game play into readable
                  discourse. This approach, however, largely limits the field of discussion for
                  these games to their existence as objects played by a
                     researcher in the past, preempting other means of using games in
                  argument. 
               The notion of reduction is important to the overall discussion of intertextual
                  surfaces and their effects on comprehension and expression. Reduction functions on
                  a spectrum aligning with the goals of a particular discourse. The reduction from
                  computer game to in-line textual citation is the most extreme form. Many others
                  make use of, in progression: still images, sequences (or juxtaposition) of images,
                  video, interactive visualization, and, in limited cases, emulation. In monographs,
                  and examples like Pinchbeck’s and Altice’s above, only still and sequenced images
                  are available. Pinchbeck narrates key areas of Doom
                  with comparative juxtapositions of different game versions, and single images of
                  key aesthetic and level design features. Altice makes extensive use of emulator
                  tools for the visual display of internal memory states, or again, like Pinchbeck,
                  comparative juxtapositions of key sequences or different passes of a rendering
                  function. 
               Outlining the full extent of image usage in game studies monographs is well
                  outside our scope, but the important consideration is the jump in textual
                  mediation that occurs in the transition from collections of images to video,
                  interactive visualization, or emulation. The textual surface described for the
                  majority of this article is one of physical print and the constraints of its
                  intertextuality. The newer forms of reduction are not mentioned by Lynch because
                  they still remain unleveraged in the sciences — there are very few online
                  publications in any field that leverage digital documents’ new textuality. Digital
                  humanists cry out for more active, digital intertextual presentation, but their
                  codified expression is only standardized in a handful of online
                     publications.Prominent examples are Kairos
                        (http://kairos.technorhetoric.net/), Scalar (http://scalar.usc.edu), and Vectors
                        (http://vectors.usc.edu).
                  Linking back, the expression of academic discussions of games is then dependent on
                  the forms of manifest intertextuality that are available and commensurate with the
                  dominant constitutive discourses that currently exist. When people want to engage
                  with games in ways that are not commensurate with textual description they make
                  use of less encumbering reductions. In our case, when trying to either explain
                  embodied system interactions or complex dynamic processes, it is helpful to move
                  beyond textual discourse as the only tool in the tool chest. 
            
            
               5 Types and Examples of Reduction
               Taking a step back, there are two key considerations at work in our discussion.
                  The first is the intertextual surface of discourse and how it makes use of
                  manifest actions, like citation, quotation, and images, in the constitution of a
                  text. The flow of an argument is aided by the integration of “other” texts such
                  that the discursive flow is smooth.Unless, as indicated above, the
                     interruption of the flow serves a discursive function — the disjunction of
                     meanings being relevant to some point or elaboration. Sometimes contrasts in
                     discursive presentation inform limitations of either one. Whenever one
                  is reading through a discussion and needs to refer to a figure, table, or other
                  interstitial manifestation, there is then, borrowing from Lynch, a gap in
                  the textual flow and thus in the discursive progression. An aim for any apparatus
                  that allows for new types of manifestation must be to consider how that
                  manifestation affects the constitution of a text, and the ways that manifestations
                  can augment or potentially further distort a discursive surface. This surface is
                  also, with advances in on-line technology and distribution methods, not only just
                  a physical sheet of flattened, dead wood, but the transmediatic — interactive —
                  surface of the computer screen and networked document. The medium of expression,
                  in the case of computer games and systems, is now of the same stuff of the medium
                  being described and discussed. There is potential for a better and more forceful
                  alignment of textual surface with digital system expression. 
               The second key consideration is how reductions assist intertextual integration to
                  enable new forms of argument. We are not the first to venture down this
                  intermedial path, and by illuminating some further examples we can highlight the
                  new types of expression that we hope to enable with the to-be-described tool. This
                  section is mainly devoted to an elaboration of the second point about methods of
                  reduction in light of the first’s concern for intertextual alignment and
                  comprehension. The following discussion includes a collection of related and
                  motivating work.
               
                  5.1 Video
                  Recall that the methods of reduction not discussed by Lynch are embedded video,
                     interactive visualization, and emulation. Embedded is key since this
                     allows us to present them as manifest intertextual objects (and later use some
                     of the discourse analytical apparatus to discuss their effects). Reduction is a
                     reduction of the embodied act of play to a form amenable to the constraints of
                     the particular intertextual surface being created. Video reduction is fast
                     becoming one of the major means for the dissemination of knowledge about how
                     games are played, and the surface characteristics of their presentation to the
                     player. As a phenomenon, this is beneficial to the progress of game historical
                     study since at the very least there will likely be some video remnants of game
                     play available to future preservation efforts.Newman (2012a) actually calls for game preservation policies to
                        prioritize videos of gameplay on the assumption that executable access is a
                        less likely future scenario. The availability of video has also
                     prompted some academics to begin experimenting with embeddable video as a means
                     for discussion. For example, Doug Wilson, in an extended discussion of the game
                        Spelunky for the Polygon website, makes
                     extensive use of embedded YouTube videos to support a discussion and
                     walkthrough of one of the game’s most difficult achievements, a no-death solo
                     eggplant run.As described in Wilson
                           (2013). The solo eggplant run is a secret completion
                        achievement for the computer game Spelunky; a
                        rogue-like dungeon exploration game modeled on Indiana Jones and “explore
                        the tomb”-type motifs. The eggplant run involves carrying a useless item
                        from the beginning of the game through completion without losing it or
                        losing one’s life. It was so difficult that it took years before its first
                        completion by Bananasauras Rex in 2013. By interweaving textual
                     description with multiple embedded videos keyed to specifically salient
                     moments, Wilson telegraphs a new type of intertextual surface where
                     narrativized gameplay description is aligned with video supports. The technical
                     mastery at work is made more apparent and visceral through the accompanying
                     videos. 
               
               
                  5.2 Visualization
                  Interactive visualizations as embedded arguments, the next step up the
                     reduction ladder, are not a significant practice in academia. Certainly,
                     visualizations — in the form of static images embedded in text — are very
                     common in physical and social sciences, and in humanistic analysis of textual
                     corpora. Woolgar and Lynch preside over two volumes dedicated to representation
                     in scientific practice that are mostly focused on the constitutive power of
                     manifest visualizations in scientific texts. The fact that the volumes are
                     separated by 30 years indicates the continuing influence of visualization on
                     scientific work. Analysis of the effect of visualizations on humanistic
                     practice is probably most expressed in the attention to algorithmic criticism
                     in the works of Stephen Ramsay — for corpora analysis — and David Staley — in
                     historical visualization — among others 
                     . However, the use of non-static, interactive
                     visualization of dynamic systems is absent from the intertextual presentation
                     of findings in most scholarly fields. The groundwork is actually being laid
                     more by those interested in the pedagogical application of visualizations. 
                  Bret Victor and his collaborators are at the forefront of so-called
                        explorable explanations, juxtapositions of online text and embedded
                     interactive visualizations designed to reveal the functionality of systems .However, being at the forefront of something
                        is not the same as inventing it. And Victor’s work is heavily
                        inspired by Alan Kay’s in active essays and Ted Nelson’s educational
                        musings in No More Teacher’s Dirty Looks from
                           Nelson (1974). For more information on
                        the genealogy of the term see Yamamiya
                           (2009). Some examples include a long explanation of the
                     basic dynamics of simple animated pathing, and Vi Hart and Nicky Case’s
                     interactive model of Thomas Schelling’s group segregation theories . Each example works to mollify the gap between
                     the textual presentation inherent to the browser window and the machinations —
                     and interactive features — of the supporting visualizations. Victor’s work
                     espouses a pedagogical philosophy of system comprehension through manipulation
                     and tacit experience. Readers are invited to read the expository prose, and
                     then play with the interactive models of the phenomena on the page. The hope is
                     that through tacit manipulation and play a deeper understanding of the
                     underlying system will develop. 
                  Victor refers to his online visualizations as reactive documents that
                     allow the reader to test out the various models presented and gain insight
                     through those interactions. The goal is to develop an active reader,
                     someone who uses the author’s argument as a springboard
                        for critical thought and deep understanding
                     . Active reading owes much to the foundational
                     pedagogical insights of Seymour Papert. Papert devoted his career to the
                     development of computational tools to aid in mathematical and algorithmic
                     thinking . He also believed that tacit experience
                     with reactive systems would support better modeling capabilities in confronting
                     new problems and challenges. He traced this potential to a youthful fascination
                     with gears that implicitly enforced a tacit understanding of complex
                     differential systems. His gears functioned as a model that enabled a better
                     understanding of math than anything I was taught in
                        elementary school
                     . The ability to present information in
                     different and interactive ways led to a new model for the exploration of
                     further knowledge. Papert linked this notion with the educational theories of
                     Jean Piaget that espoused the assimilation of concepts into a learner’s
                     world view. Papert’s gears functioned as an affective model, a mapping
                     (assimilation) between their relational dynamics and other mathematical
                     concepts. Victor’s work is then an attempt to embed these “affective models” as
                     interactive visualizations into online documents. 
                  The design and application of affective models that encourage comprehension of
                     technical concepts is important for our larger argument about the potential for
                     new forms of intertextuality to support new argumentation. Victor presents a
                     prototypical means of doing more with online texts, and trying to engage the
                     reader with the systemic processes under discussion. Victor’s reactive
                     documents are a new discursive surface, one populated with interactive features
                     aimed at creating a new type of active reader. They are also the result of a
                     reduction from larger, complex system dynamics to concentrated, pedagogical
                     visualizations designed to support textual arguments. The reduction, however,
                     is much richer than an image or video, since it can support the creation of a
                     tacit, embodied argument. Instead of referencing an image or video of a system
                     processes, a smaller part of the system can be introduced into the discourse
                     describing it — or, better yet, use the interactive surface as an argument in
                     of itself for a particular point of view or affective process. 
               
               
                  5.3 Emulation
                  Before discussing emulation as a form of reduction — in line with the
                     progression outlined above — we need to clarify some basic technical
                     distinctions and provide some related examples. This is necessary because the
                     use of emulated systems as a form of argumentation about software history — or
                     really any topic for that matter — has not before, to our knowledge, been
                     explored or theorized. 
                  Emulation, as a computational process, is the use of one system in reproducing
                     the functionality and output of another.More technically, it is a technique for implementing a virtual machine on a host
                           computer whose instruction set is different from the host
                           computer’s
                        . Although the line between
                        virtualization and emulation does get a bit murky by this definition — the
                        computer I’m typing this on, a MacBook Pro running Apple Mac OS X 10.11,
                        shares the same basic instruction set with a Sony PlayStation 4 — the
                        encapsulation of one system within another is the basic function of
                        emulation. Emulators, the programs responsible for emulation, are
                     used in many corners of the software industry to allow for testing of
                     applications on a variety of devices. For instance, most mobile phone
                     applications are not developed on mobile phones. They are programmed in
                     emulation on laptops and desktops more conducive to long bouts of typing and
                     heartache. As noted by Nathan Altice, emulation has a long history tracing back
                     to the historical origins of software development . In the 1960s IBM developed the first sets of commercial
                     emulators to allow software written for one mainframe model to be compatible
                     with another. 
                  More recently, in the 1990s, enthusiast game communities began to create
                     emulators of popular game systems, like the Nintendo Entertainment System.
                     Targeting then-current operating systems like Windows 95, these emulators
                     allowed for the (re)play of older titles that might no longer be available for
                     purchase, were released in foreign territories, or might otherwise be difficult
                     to acquire. The games in this usage were data dumps extracted from the
                     physical cartridges, and other forms of magnetic and optical media. For
                     cartridge systems, these files are known as ROMs since they are copies
                     of a cartridge’s read-only memory. A more general term for data extract from a
                     media format is a data image, more commonly shortened to
                        image. The use of image in referring to an extracted
                        data set is drawn from operations in mathematics. When you use a function to
                        operate on a set of numbers, you are mapping the input values with potential
                        outputs. In the case of y = x + 1, y is a function of x (f(x)) with x
                        standing for a range of input values, and y for the output values of the
                        function. The input values in this case “map” through the function to a
                        specific set of output values. This resultant map, which is just the set of
                        inputs each incremented by 1, is an image of those inputs in a new
                        domain. Similarly, the data extracted from a physical medium is not the same
                        data (nothing changes from the physical medium’s point of view) but a
                        mapping of the data stored on that medium to an equivalent set of data now
                        migrated from the media to another machine. Thus, imaging is very
                        directly the process of mapping the data stored on a specific physical media
                        to an identical configuration on a separate machine with its own storage.
                        This distinction between types of data, and the means by which they are
                        migrated, mapped and translated between machines will become relevant below
                        for issues of reduction. Emulators operate on data formatted for a
                     specific system, and over the last 20 years, emulation development and the
                     extraction of legacy data from physical formats has flourished. Emulators now
                     exist for thousands of different computational platforms, and are a ripe source
                     for the exploration of software history. That is, assuming one ignores some
                     significant legal issues.Emulation, specifically in its
                        copying and use of potentially copyrighted data, is in unclear legal
                        territory. The current GISST system would therefore need to be modified to
                        adapt a BYOD (bring your own data) approach where users provide their own
                        legal game data for citable manipulation. Another alternative would be for
                        GISST to function as a research service, like a more conventional research
                        database, within which executable citations would function for institutions
                        paying for the service. Counterintuitively, providing GISST as a service
                        that draws from data stored on third-party sites elsewhere on the Internet,
                        like ROM sharing sites, may help limit legal risk for institutions. A GISST
                        service tailored to enable only legitimate fair uses would be less exposed
                        to liability than sites that support a broad array of more legally dubious
                        uses. GISST could rely on third-party sites for content without necessarily
                        taking on the risk associated with making the content available for
                        open-ended reuse. For more extensive legal information on this topic, check
                        out the aforementioned McDonough (2010)
                        and Rosenthal (2015).
                  
                  Important for our discussion of manifest intertextual presentation are recent
                     developments in web browser technology (and speed improvements in general) that
                     now make it feasible to run emulators inside online documents. The potential
                     for embedded emulation has not yet been exploited or thoroughly explored.
                     However, because most web browsers now run highly optimized JavaScript
                     compilers, in-browser emulation is a growing phenomenon. The most prominent
                     example is the JavaScript Multiple Arcade Machine Emulator (MAME) project. MAME
                     began as a system for emulating arcade machines. Complementarily, the Multiple
                     Emulator Super System (MESS), using a fork of MAME’s code base, provided
                     support for most personal computers. MAME was open sourced in 2016 and MAME and
                     MESS are now merged. The combined infrastructure supports thousands of
                     different arcade machines and personal computers released over the last 40
                        years.The MAME project is known for its attention to detail and
                        support for esoteric systems. For example, one addition in 2016 was a Sonic
                        the Hedgehog popcorn vending machine with embedded display, SegaSonic
                        Popcorn Shop, that was marketed only in 1993 in certain Japanese
                        cities. Initially a large C++ project, the Internet Archive, along
                     with a collection of motivated developers, ported key components of MESS —
                     before its integration with MAME — to JavaScript to create the Internet Arcade,
                     a playable archive of the Internet Archive’s imaged software collection. After
                     the open-source combination, JavaScript became one of a number of compilation
                     targets for the entire MAME-MESS code base. 
                  Similarly, many other emulators began organizing compilation to JavaScript.
                     This included the emulators DOSBox, for legacy x86 MS-DOS machines; FCEUX, for
                     the Nintendo Entertainment System; and Snes9x, for the Super Nintendo
                     Entertainment System.Many other emulators now have JavaScript versions,
                        the three listed above are the three we use in the citation tool and so are
                        explicitly mentioned. For a full listing of emulators (including JavaScript)
                        check https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_video_game_emulators
                        which keeps a running list of projects and compatibility.
                  
                  Now that emulation is available in browsers, it is possible to place both a
                     running program and the text describing or commenting on it onto the same
                     intertextual surface. In the progression of reductions from images to
                     interactive visualization, there was always a clear notion of how each step
                     still represents a deficient copy of some object or system outside the text.
                     For images and video, as mentioned by Lynch above, researchers put in a
                     significant amount of effort to both make their samples more photogenic and
                     thus more interpretable when presented on a textual surface. In dynamic
                     visualizations, there is an implicit understanding that we are being presented
                     with part of a system that has been distilled for comprehension and reader
                     engagement. The very act of visualization is to provide a specific perspective
                     (of many) on the data or system under discussion. With emulation, there does
                     not appear to be a similar process at work. While the emulation is a program
                     designed to conform to the constraints of a digital document, it is not a
                     distillation of a system but a full version of the system itself. This
                     challenges the basic premise of intertextuality presented above, that the texts
                     made manifest in and reduced to a specific discursive surface are under the
                     basic control of the author.The inclusion of full emulated systems in a
                        document might be closer to Ted Nelson’s notion of transclusion than
                        to traditional, print-based models of intertextuality. In Nelson’s proposed
                        (and, with Autodesk’s involvement, partially implemented) Xanadu system, a
                        precursor of the World Wide Web, portions of documents could be manifestly
                        represented inside other documents by transcluding a portion of a
                        full version of the document. Those reading a Xanadu document could reach a
                        full version of any transcluded document, or change the portion viewed
                        through the transclusion window, or pull it up alongside the
                        transcluding document, as easily as we now traverse links on the Web —
                        making the transcluded document somewhat less under the control of the
                        transcluding. For more, see Nelson
                        (1993). While some manipulation or presupposition — in cases
                     where the author is misremembering or functioning with a divergent set of
                     assumptions in regards to the reader — is always a potential issue, that the
                     manifest references might have a mind or operation of their own was never
                     imagined. In bringing emulation into the text, we therefore encounter a new
                     type of intertextual interaction, and with it a different model of reduction —
                     a model that requires significantly more effort in the legitimation of claims
                     and the interpretive exercise. Presupposition of played experience cannot exert
                     the same power because the system — the same system — is available to both
                     author and reader. 
                  The imbrication of emulation into argumentative texts has only been lightly
                     attempted in the past. Nick Montfort wrote an article for the electronic book review that embedded a Java
                     plugin-based emulation of the Infocom game Deadline . The Java-based plugins are now flagged as security threats, and
                        even forcing the browser to ignore those warnings did not result in the
                        emulations executing correctly. However, his argument does not
                     particularly integrate the emulation so much as position it in the article to
                     simply show such a move is possible. Others have used online emulation for
                     deeper systemic analysis. One notable example is Ben Fry’s early online
                     visualization of the internal memory state of the Nintendo Entertainment
                     System. The deconstructulator is a Java-based
                     in-browser emulator based on a modified version of the NESCafe emulator . On a preservationist note, while the deconstructulator (https://www.benfry.com/deconstructulator) is still available, it
                        requires a Java plugin to function. Due to security concerns over the last
                        decade, Java support has been dropped or disabled in many browsers. There is
                        no longer any mention of the NESCafe emulator on its creator’s website, and
                        its most recent update (July 22, 2008 according to https://www.zophar.net/java/nes/nescafe.html) is over 10 years old
                        as of this writing in 2019. The visualization presents three
                     different windows, a rendering of the full sprite memory of Super Mario Bros., a playable emulation of that game,
                     and the active memory contents of the NES’s PPU (Picture Processing Unit), a
                     component that manages sprite rendering on positioning on screen. As the player
                     plays Super Mario Bros., the contents of the
                     sprite map highlight the currently active sprites in use, and the PPU map shows
                     the current state of each 8x8 tile in the PPU. By moving Mario around, the
                     player can see how the different animations and changes to the game’s
                     background, enemies and platforms modify the NES’s system memory. Fry designed
                     the piece for his Visually Deconstructing Code
                     series, a set of small projects aimed at unearthing some of the hidden
                     processes at work in NES code. 
                  Other examples of emulation as a revelatory mechanism exist within the
                     communities devoted to forms of what James Newman refers to as superplay
                     . Activities like speed-running (both human and
                     tool-assisted), glitch-hunting, sequence-breaking, and other forms of performative mastery of games benefit from research
                     conducted with emulation. Many community emulators support tools for memory
                     analysis and even scripting languages for the live manipulation of a running
                     game. This allows player-performers interested in, for example, shaving that
                     last second off of a run or getting past a boss without attacking, to dig
                     beneath the representational surface of the game and mine its system for
                     potential solutions. Some online streamers, like Clyde Mandelin, write custom
                     emulator modifications that allow for live streaming of both their gameplay and
                     aggregated statistics or interactive visualizations of the underlying
                        system.See https://www.youtube.com/user/ClydeMandelin, specifically Poemato CX's Twitch Stream Magic
                        https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rX87i71IC7g As we will
                     discuss below, it is becoming clear that a community of practice is developing
                     around the expressive potential of emulators. It’s also a sign that the
                     products of community historical efforts are becoming more aligned with digital
                     humanist insights about technical collaboration between academia and
                        amateurs. See Rinehart (2014) for a
                        more detailed discussion of the benefits and perils of incidental community
                        archival practices.
                  
                  However, it is also necessary to note that, in placing a running program into
                     an online text, its reduction to that surface may suggest a raft of potentially
                     misleading assertions about the historical play experience. As outlined
                     extensively in the work of preservation-minded historical researchers,
                     emulation, in its erasure of the original executable context, denies the
                     experience of the original hardware 
                     
                     
                     
                     . The modern web browser, as a displayed surface,
                     is very different from an Atari-era CRT, and most modern machines do not have a
                     way to interface with original peripherals. Additionally, many emulators try to
                     make the played experience smoother by modifying speed for the sake of
                        accuracy.Some emulators running in constrained environments, like
                        JavaScript emulators in web browsers, need to cut corners to get processing
                        up to an acceptable speed. Other emulators running in native execution
                        contexts, like Microsoft Windows applications, sometimes intentionally slow
                        down processing in order to match the timings of older machines.
                  
                  They also remove old constraints on the swapping of disks to load parts of the
                     program in piecemeal and internal memory limitations. However, not all aspects
                     of emulation are a historical loss, since the position of the emulation as
                     running inside a host process allows for the introspection and revelation
                     mentioned in the above examples. The ability that many emulators provide to
                     save and load memory states is also, as we will see, a boon to players and
                     researchers hoping to encounter difficult, confusing or novel locations inside
                     games. 
                  A key note about the reductions above is their ability to bring something from
                     “out there in the world” into the text. Usually those studying academic
                     discourse, or the social construction of academic arguments, focus on how that
                     external evidence is transformed into a manifest object in the text. For
                     scientific work, we have mentioned both discourse analysis and science and
                     technology studies as fields that theorize on the reduction and distortion of
                     tacit laboratory knowledge into written discourse.See Woolgar (1986) for a discussion of the
                        different philosophical roots behind discourse analysis (Continental
                        Philosophy) and STS (Anglo-American Analytic Philosophy). In the
                     humanities, citation and reduction are less epistemologically fraught, since
                     the aim of humanistic discourse is not generally to re-organize some empirical
                     object or finding into a textual form suitable for publication. 
                  Within history, the use of manifest intertextuality is critically important to
                     the sustenance of the field, but the act of manifestation does not usually
                     imply a reduction of a finding out there; the out there of
                     historical sources being mainly other texts. Rarely is the historical object,
                     if there is one, reduced to a form commensurate with the textual surface. In
                     fact, much historical work into objects specifically addresses this issue, a
                     good example being John Law’s work in aircraft design that explicitly
                     constructs different historical strands of documentation to reveal the fractal
                     nature of the object in question. In his case, he looks at the construction of
                     the British TSR2 strike and reconnaissance aircraft, and how it exists as an
                     object of engineering, marketing, and an embodiment of the projection of
                     hegemonic force. The aircraft is viewed along different evidentiary axes to
                     support a conclusion about how objects exist in myriad ways depending on how
                     they are documented and narrativized. This again ties back to ideas from
                     discourse analysis, mainly in how the constitutive intertextuality at work in
                     the history of science and technology defines the objects of analysis; a
                     summary from Steve Woolgar: Surely, it is often said,
                           it is absurd to say that we cannot distinguish between a thing and what
                           is said about that thing. But the constitutive view does not prohibit
                           such distinctions. It offers us a way of seeing these distinctions as
                           actively created achievements rather than as pre-given features of our
                           world. In particular, the distinction between talk and objects-of-talk is
                           seen from the constitutive perspective as the upshot, rather than the
                           condition, of discursive work.
                        
                  
                  The fundamental takeaway is that previously, describing any technical system as
                     a historical object necessitated various forms of reduction and other
                     intertextual strategies to remediate and insert it into a text. With embedded
                     emulation, and to a lesser extent dynamic visualization, embedding the system
                     itself must now be reconciled. When John Law describes his aircraft, he could
                     not bring the aircraft into the text and let the reader hop into the cockpit.
                     With computational systems increasingly the site of construction and reception
                     for scholarly work, and with technical historical objects that are also
                     computational systems, we can literally transcribe discussed objects into
                     discourse and invite the reader to take the flight stick. 
               
            
            
               6 Back to Citation and Archives
               In bringing a non-text-based object into textual discourse — like the reductions
                  of image, video, visualization, and emulation above — there is a key link to
                  archives and citation that has not been made explicit. In the case of online
                  documents that incorporate various reductions, those texts are not singular
                  objects but networked organizations contingent on access to the various sources of
                  reduction. If one prints an image alongside text, the image is now part of the
                  textual form, and is, from an archival standpoint, part of the same object. With
                  online work, every page of information is an aggregate object. The basic markup
                  for the page comes from one source, the styling of that page from another, and all
                  the various images and other embedded entities from still others within that same
                  domain or from some other (hopefully trusted) source. When things are embedded —
                  as images, videos, visualizations, and emulations are — they necessitate and
                  depend on the existence and maintenance of stable links to recover their data. 
               The maintenance of these links is a significant issue for the stability of
                  knowledge online. Whenever a link leaves its local namespace (assuming that
                  internal network links are maintained, which is not always a given) it relies on
                  the existence, capabilities, and restrictions of a remote hosting repository. For
                  videos, most content links resolve thanks to the embedded link architectures of
                  mass scale video sites like YouTube or Vimeo. This allows the embedder to neither
                  have to maintain their own video server nor provide the bandwidth necessary for
                  playback. It also removes responsibility for intellectual property management and
                  ties access to embedded content to the whims of the content provider. In the
                     Spelunky example above, Wilson toyed with the
                  constraints of YouTube’s embedded video player to reveal specific salient content
                  inside the game. That action was only made possible by the affordances of YouTube,
                  the repository hosting the content. In the case of historically stable online
                  academic discourse, it should be apparent that any new ability to share or link to
                  digital data incurs a commensurate necessity for a functional and stable
                  repository. The current solutions for video leave a lot to be desired given that
                  they are bound to the corporate imperatives of actors not emphatically concerned
                  with preservation or link stability.This issue must be addressed as we
                     explore the future of academic publishing. An intriguing example is Alexandra
                     Juhasz's Learning from YouTube, an online book
                     which includes and links to many YouTube videos, published by The MIT Press in
                     partnership with the Alliance for Networking Visual Culture . Given YouTube’s (and the wider corporate web’s) lack
                     of concern for preservation and stability, one of the first pages readers are
                     likely to encounter (HOW TO USE THIS VIDEO-BOOK)
                     suggests that they can help the project by reporting broken links. It’s
                     difficult to imagine such a request in a book built on research in a
                     traditional archive. (What form would it even take?) 
               
               The tool below is an attempt to organize a prototypical archive for embedded
                  emulated content, and to try and reconcile some of the manifest intertextuality
                  present in game historical work to a more stable set of practices regarding
                  citation and linking. In the case of embedded emulation, the data has similar
                  issues to that of video. Namely, that the IP rights for the distribution of
                  streaming copyrighted gameplay data need to be correctly managed, and that the
                  embedded content be presented in such a way to make it useful for inclusion into
                  texts. The consideration for future scholarly use of emulated content is a way to
                  dictate what a speculative collection of such works would look like at a larger,
                  institutional scale. Additionally, the consistent citation of this content, as an
                  initial condition of the system’s functionality, should be a concern for any
                  future work in the creation of links to new forms of digital expression and
                  reduction. 
            
            
               7 A Tool for Descriptive and Manifest Citation of Games
               This section outlines the design and functionality of the citation system in the
                  Game and Interactive Software Scholarship Toolkit (GISST). GISST is a suite of
                  tools aimed at helping with common game studies and game historical tasks, and
                  includes a system for the management of manifest citation of both game emulation
                  and game bibliographic references. The citation component of GISST — described
                  below as the citation tool — is designed to partially address numerous
                  issues presented above: 
               
                  The need for more consistent bibliographic citation information for computer
                     games. 
                  An example use case for the placement and manipulation of various reductions
                     of computer games into online text (in this case, images, videos and live
                     emulation).
                  The need for a managed archive of the reductions used in (2). 
               
               The citation tool functions on three classes of objects — games, performances, and
                  game system states — and resolves issues 1-3 for each. Game objects
                  are collections of data about a game. This includes both basic descriptive
                  metadata (required for correct bibliographic entries) and links to executable data
                  needed to run the game in browser emulation. Performance objects are
                  records of games as played or viewed by a player or group. These records also
                  combine viewable performance data with descriptive metadata. By viewable
                     performance data we mean two possible things. One is a collection of image
                  frames — GIFs or video — representing some situated act of play. The other is
                     replay data — input stream recordings for emulators or replay
                  files for a specific game engine.The term game engine is commonly
                     used for software platforms that support particular types of game play
                     experiences. Some are relatively specific, such as the id Tech engines
                     primarily used for first-person shooter games. Some are more general, such as
                     the Unity engine, which is used for many types of graphical games — but which
                     would be ill-suited to text adventure or interactive fiction games, for
                     example. However, more broadly, a game’s engine can describe the game’s
                     processes as separated from its data. This is why Nathan Altice can describe
                     community-produced data that targets the software and hardware processes of
                     1980s Nintendo Entertainment System games as spawning
                        fresh games from obsolete engines
                      (Emulators are discussed in section 5.3). If this sounds like a slippery
                     concept, that’s because it is. As Eike Falk Anderson, Steffen Engel, Peter
                     Comninos, and Leigh McLoughlin put it, [T]here is
                        disagreement about exactly what a game engine is, with sometimes fundamental
                        differences between definitions
                     . Nevertheless, it remains a useful
                     concept in practice.For any game that displays to a screen, players may attempt
                     to capture game play performances using screen recordings, resulting in a
                     series of image frames. In addition, some games support the creation of “replay
                     files” — which cause the performance to be re-enacted in the game/engine
                     software, reducing file size and making it possible to, for example, change the
                     perspective from which the performance is viewed. Some emulators support
                     interaction through input streams — which cause a scripted set of
                     controller events to be executed at particular times. If the input stream is a
                     recording of the controller events of a particular performance, and the game
                     begins from the same computational state, the result will be a reproduction of
                     the performance in the game/engine.
                  Game system states are snapshots of a game’s run-time memory, either
                  saved by the emulator as a separate file or extracted directly from a system’s
                  memory. 
               The tool manages game, performance, and game state records in a database, and
                  allows for the embedding of any of these in a hypertext (assuming executable or
                  viewable performance data is available). The rest of this section briefly accounts
                  for the inclusion of performance in our citation apparatus and then lays out the
                  functionality and potential future work for the tool.
               
                  7.1 Game v Performance
                  The discussion above has mostly dealt with the citation of game objects as a
                     means of presupposing their content and the contours of their gameplay.
                     However, game performances as events are also commonly referenced in scholarly
                     works. Performances result from two activities: games-as-performance, in the
                     case of games tied to explicit geo-temporal contexts (alternate reality games
                     (ARGs), installations, etc.) and gameplay performance. Gameplay performance is
                     the play of a game that is not explicitly tied to a geo-temporal context, but
                     that gains relevance from being situated in one. An example is a particular
                     match at a fighting game tournament, where the event itself highlights game
                     play as performance. The game in this case is not the operative site of
                     performative relevance: its play at the tournament is. If the same match
                     occurred in practice in a dorm room, it would not have the same significance. 
                  Game performances as significant historical sources are well discussed in the
                     literature. Clara Fernández-Vara, in her Introduction to Game Analysis, notes
                     that, we may want to analyze a game that is an event, a
                        be-there-or-be-square type of thing, a performance
                     . She describes the need for
                     secondary sources — paratexts like video or firsthand description — in
                     helping to reconstruct and corroborate information about a performance. This
                     sentiment is echoed in Henry Lowood’s work on the reconstruction of events that
                     take place in massively multiplayer online games (MMOGs) . In this case, the study of virtual world game play
                     is more akin to anthropological work. The game itself, while it could be
                     recovered and run through emulation in the future, is devoid of the community
                     that created meaning through the performative space and affordances the world
                     provided. Lowood remarks on the fallacy of an ideal perfect capture of
                     every event and input supplied to the virtual world.
                  Even if we save every bit of a virtual world — its software and the data
                     associated with it and stored on its servers, along with a replay of every
                     moment as seen by players — it may still be the case that we have completely
                     lost its history. The essential problem with this approach is that it leaves
                     out the identification and preservation of historical documentation, and these
                     sources are rarely to be found in the data inside game and virtual worlds or on
                     the servers that support them .
                  Even with access to game replay files, or reproductions through emulation,
                     evidence of a game performance must also be paired with secondary information
                     to substantiate and analyze it. Our inclusion of performance citations in the
                     tool is to enable a link between the game object’s data and description, and
                     further contextualizing performances. Additionally, the ability to embed
                     emulation in line with historical performance video and description adds
                     further potential for somatic contextualization of game play. By bringing the
                     emulated system to the reader, they can gain a sense of what Steve Swink refers
                     to as game feel, an embodied understanding of the
                     game system as felt through the act of play .Swink’s game feel is focused exclusively on continuous input
                        games, like platformers or action titles. Doug Wilson has argued that
                           game feel should extend to other types of interactions with
                        computational feedback systems, from menu systems to mouse interaction in
                        strategy games . We take the latter, more liberal
                        view of game feel in the context of providing an emulated system in argument
                        for the significance of a performative act or as a means of elaborating on a
                        deeper understanding of embodied play experiences. Pairing this
                     embodied understanding of a game play system with performances adds another
                     level of intuitive understanding to historical game play acts. 
               
               
                  7.2 Citation Tool
                  The citation tool has two primary components: 
                  
                     A command line interface (CLI) responsible for the ingestion of game and
                        performance data, the generation of citations, and the management of the
                        citation database. 
                     A web application (the app) that enables the live emulation of
                        ingested game data, the live recording of game play performances, and the
                        live recording of computational game states. 
                  
                  For the rest of this section we will use CLI to refer to the first component,
                     and “app” to refer to the second. Their functionality is significantly
                     interrelated, for example the CLI launches the app and the app’s backend server
                     calls the CLI for certain processing tasks. The next two sections provide a
                     very brief technical overview of both components; we refer the reader to our
                     prior work for a more detailed account . Figure 1
                     illustrates the relationships between the various components.
                  
                     GISST components and pipeline.
                     
                  
                  In the GISST pipeline, input resources (1) are fed to the CLI (2), which
                     extracts their information (3) into an extraction table (for URLs) or the
                     citation database (for performance and game data). The Web Application reads
                     from the citation database (4) and the Indexer uses CiteState.js to create
                     further citable resources (5). CiteState.js (the software powering the
                     augmented Doom walkthrough from our introduction)
                     can then use those resources’ permanent URLs (6) and its own citation function
                     (7) to embed an executable program into a target HTML element (8).
                  Extraction begins with either local filenames or Universal Resource Identifiers
                     (URIs). For games, the extraction files are either game data files or
                     directories containing game data. Providing a URI to the game extraction
                     command assumes that the linked resource hosts information about a particular
                     game; currently, extraction supports game reference URIs for either MobyGames
                     or Wikipedia. Performance extraction only accepts URIs from YouTube presently,
                     but the design is modular and could easily support, for example, archives of
                     game input sequences.http://tasvideos.org/Movies.html contains a listing of different
                        platforms along with downloads for their various movie formats, which
                        are usually files of tabulated input sequences. 
                  
                  Extraction obtains rough, noisy data from the given source or sources, with the
                     assumption that a researcher will clean up the imported metadata. The
                     extraction step is necessary to construct a stable citation because the
                     information provided by a potential resource may exceed the constraints of the
                     database's descriptive metadata scheme or require further disambiguation. As an
                     example, the Wikipedia page for Super Mario Bros.,
                     originally released for the Nintendo Entertainment System, combines all
                     information about the title, in all of its different versions and releases,
                     onto a single page. Our Wikipedia extractor presents all of this information to
                     the user and allows them to choose the particular version of Super Mario Bros. they wish to later cite. 
                  GISST currently allows for extraction from a variety of sources and file types,
                     as shown in Table 1 below:The table does not include game states because
                        the CLI does not ingest arbitrary state data. This is mainly due to the fact
                        that emulated state data is specific to both a game and the emulator
                        supporting it and effectively useless without those dependencies.
                        Additionally, in the case of some of GISST’s supported emulators, like
                        DOSBox, there are no independent save state formats, just data derived from
                        the live emulation during run-time. That said, GISST-saved states should in
                        principle be portable across browsers running the GISST app.
                  

                  
                     Table 1: GISST Supported Resources
                     
                        Citation Type
                        Supported File Types
                        Supported URI Sources
                     
                     
                        Game
                        
                           .NES ROM Format
                           .SMC ROM Format
                           Any directory containing a DOS compiled executable
                           .z64 ROM Format (partial)
                        
                        
                           MobyGames
                           Wikipedia
                        
                     
                     
                        Performance
                        
                           FM2 Replay Format
                           Generic Video Files
                        
                        YouTube
                     
                  
                  Any source data that is extracted (currently game files and videos) is linked
                     to a dependent citation entry. This allows for the recovery of source data in
                     the web application interface through either emulation or video playback. 
               
               
                  7.3 Web Application
                  The GISST app is a standard browser-based web application, with a
                     JavaScript/HTML/CSS front-end designed for use with the Chrome web-browser, and
                     a backend interface that is linked to the same database and ingestion commands
                     as the CLI. This is marked as steps 4 and 5 in Figure 1 above. The app allows
                     for the play, recording and citation of game states through CiteState.js (a
                     suite of automated JavaScript ports of emulators).
                  The app’s interface supports four basic views of citation data: 
                  
                     A basic listing page for the game and performance citations in the
                        database. 
                     A full text search page that includes all citation records and game save
                        state descriptions. 
                     A citation listing page that provides active links to previous save
                        states and, for performances, the ability to create quick GIF animations
                        based on a performance video. 
                     An indexer page that allows for examination of an emulated game, and the
                        creation of game save states and video recordings. 
                  
                  Entries 1-3 are mainly presented as data tables supplemented with item 3’s
                     “active links.” The indexer, however, is the primary user interface for game
                     scholars interested in creating new performance data. The indexer integrates
                     live game play with game performance recording, retrieval, and reference tools.
                     The game moments captured in our introductory Doom
                     example were all acquired and stored via this indexer interface.
                  
                     Indexer User Interface. The emulation window is on the left, with a
                        recording of that window displayed on the right.
                     
                  
                  Proceeding to the app’s user interface (displayed in Figure 2), we will briefly
                     describe each button and component. The buttons under the main emulation window
                     provide for most of the data recording features. The user can load the
                     emulation, save a state, load the most recently saved state, control video
                     recording, and mute audio. When a state is saved, it is logged in the
                        Available States tab along with a screen shot and generated
                     descriptive information. Clicking on any available state will cause the
                     emulator to immediately load that state into the main window. After a state is
                     selected, the State tab in the left side bar lets the user change its
                     descriptive metadata. All changes logged in the side bar are propagated to the
                     server and will show up in search queries. Video recording functions in a
                     similar way. Any time a start-stop sequence is completed, the beginning and
                     ending state of the emulation will be saved along with the video. 
                  Each recorded performance appears in the Available Performances tab.
                     Clicking on a performance updates the sidebar’s Performance tab,
                     allowing for the review of a recorded video and editing of its generated
                     metadata. 
                  Any performance or state saved in the analysis tool will appear in the main
                     citation listing page, and on individual pages for each respective game and
                     performance. The state links on each individual page operate as active
                        links, in that they will load up the indexer page with the correct state
                     preloaded into the emulator. This makes each active link a link into a running
                     emulation as a specific point. We take up the pedagogical and analytical
                     implications of this in our expert evaluation review (in the next major section
                     of this article). 
                  The indexer, in creating and storing the saved states and performance
                     recordings, provides the source material for future links created by the
                     CiteState.js module. The CiteState.js interface allows for a simple description
                     of a target page element and an id from the citation database. CiteState.js
                     then automatically handles the loading of a game, performance, or state, and
                     places it into an HTML element that can be aligned by the user through CSS
                     styling or other means of element positioning (this is steps 6-8 in Figure 1
                     above). This completes the chain from source ingestion through shared linking
                     of a game emulation in a web browser.
               
               
                  7.4 Future Work
                  The citation tool opens up numerous opportunities for the dissemination and
                     standardization of game historical sources. For bibliographic record purposes,
                     all the information in a specific citation store could be exported into forms
                     compatible with common citation database formats, like BibTeX, or linked with
                     citation systems, like Zotero.http://www.zotero.org These citations could also
                     automatically include information about a compatible emulator and the
                     file-specific data required by more technical scholars, like the platform and
                     software studies researchers mentioned above. 
                  In the realm of reductions, since the emulation is a full computing system
                     running in a web page, its memory and operations are totally available to
                     introspection via other concurrent JavaScript processes. We are already working
                     on including memory manipulation functionality in the CiteState.js interface,
                     which would provide dynamic visualization of a complete program to occur
                     coincidentally in the browser surface. 
                  Lastly, since each of the citation types, games, performances, and game states
                     also require a linkage between the citation and some form of born-digital data,
                     new forms of storage and retrieval will be necessary. There is some work on
                     storing and loading emulated systems or sharing the results of emulation
                     produced on cloud-based servers, but still no general solutions for the storage
                     and retrieval of executable software, nor support for citation as envisaged in
                     the functionality of the tool above. 
                  The next section — an expert evaluation of GISST’s citation component by
                     practicing game studies scholars and library professionals — also presents some
                     significant ideas for future work. 
               
            
            
               8 Evaluation
               As described, the citation component of GISST is an argument for more rigorous
                  citation of computer games, and for the augmentation of their expression in game
                  studies discourse. We believe the tool can ease the citation burden for game
                  scholars and allow them to create new types of arguments and expressions about
                  games. To corroborate this belief, we conducted a speculative expert evaluation of
                  the tool, inviting comment from a group of professionals engaged with game study
                  and preservation. The goal of the study was to ascertain if the intentions of the
                  tool were clear, if our thoughts above aligned with those of practicing scholars,
                  and to invite constructive commentary. This section outlines the evaluation and
                  its responses, and how those responses aligned with our goals and ignited ideas
                  for future work and collaboration. 
               The evaluation consisted of a set of 11 questions to be answered based on a
                  5-minute introduction to the CLI and web app components of the tool. We sent the
                  evaluation to a select group of practitioners consisting of game designers, game
                  studies scholars, and librarians. These groups align with those we hope will
                  benefit most from the citation tool. All those chosen were already aware of GISST,
                  and the video served as a reminder of functionality that had at some point been
                  demonstrated to them in person. Responses were collected from seven people through
                  an online form. Respondents included: Henry Lowood, curator of the History of
                  Science and Technology and Film and Media Collections at Stanford University;
                  Chaim Gingold, a game designer and historical researcher; Nathan Altice, a
                  professor and game historian at the University of California, Santa Cruz; James
                  Newman, a professor and game historian at the University of BathSpa; Glynn
                  Edwards, head of technical services in Special Collections at Stanford University
                  Libraries; Shane Denson, a professor of Art History at Stanford; Douglas Wilson, a
                  game designer and lecturer at RMIT University; and a professor who wished to
                  remain anonymous.Reviewers commented on the gender imbalance (6:2
                     male/female) among the evaluation set. Initial requests for commentary were
                     sent to a slightly more diverse set (9:5) of evaluators, however limits due to
                     publishing deadlines prevented further pursuit of more gender parity. Continued
                     evaluative work on the GISST tool set will be sure to more suitably address
                     this disparity.  The remainder of this section will describe the
                  responses to the tool, followed by recommended improvements. 
               
                  8.1 Discussion
                  Overall, the responses were overwhelmingly positive, with one game studies
                     scholar stating that the availability of the tools could be huge for the
                     field. The respondents hailed from an overlapping set of backgrounds, but the
                     responses aligned along two basic paths. The first was how the tool could
                     affect game studies and game historical practices in citation, and what the
                     tool could contribute, through state citation and retrieval, to students and
                     game studies scholars. The second turned toward more of the potential for
                     preservation that the tool presents in its management of game citation and game
                     states.
                  The potential influences noted for game studies practice included (1) the
                     formalization of game citation practices, (2) the removal of obstacles to game
                     access, (3) the automation of game history tasks currently taken on in an
                     ad-hoc manner, and (4) the presentation of deeper, and more comprehensive,
                     historical analysis. Multiple respondents noted the tool’s implicit call for a
                     more formal and robust citation practice for
                     games, with Henry Lowood stating that the tool provided a first take on a
                        citation framework where there was none. The
                     tool functioned as a way to call attention to the potential of better citation
                     practices. James Newman explained, a contribution of the
                        tool will surely be to heighten discussion of citation and [its] limits and
                        variations in current practices. This therefore aligns with our
                     arguments for more consistent citation practice in the game studies section
                     above. 
                  Altice, Newman and Shane Denson highlighted the tools’ ability to provide an
                     easier route to specific game locations and gameplay sequences. Altice and
                     Denson specifically work on comparative analysis of game versions and
                     emulators, so the potential for the tool to make parts of games more reachable
                     was appreciated 
                     . This concern for access to game history also
                     extended to the other scholars, who all remarked on the ability of the tool to
                     make classroom lectures more engaging, and according to Altice provide for
                        in-class play that isn’t contingent upon equipment or
                        playing skill. He felt this allowed for a wider
                        breadth of examples since lengthy equipment set up or hours spent
                     trying to get to a particular spot in a game could be removed from the
                     equation. Altice also felt that this approach could make exploring games like
                        flipping to a relevant page in a book, which could make
                        citation more prolific and illustrative. He also believed that
                     playing a game’s citation would have a more powerful rhetorical effect than
                     other forms of reduction, nicely pairing with our claims about rhetoric and
                     game feel above. Chaim Gingold also felt that the tools provided a significant
                     new way to share content with students. He imagined providing state citations
                     to students in the future as one might today assign videos on YouTube or
                     Twitch. 
                  The tools as an automated solution for citation also struck a chord with the
                     researchers who already use an assortment of ad-hoc solutions for emulation,
                     and gameplay recordings and analysis. Newman already organizes a rather complex
                     chain of tools for gameplay capture and analysis, and the tools provided a way
                     to alleviate some of the burden in getting multiple programs and systems to
                     work together. Gingold also noted that the tools could allow students to engage
                     in the types of historical analysis that are only available to
                     interdisciplinary scholars with programming and humanities backgrounds.
                     Students could incorporate their interaction into their
                        scholarship (like us!), and provide them a starting point for more
                     detailed analysis of design and game play interactions. 
                  The last major response area (in this first thread of responses, on game
                     studies and game historical practices) was about the ability for the tools to
                     provide a new level of analysis for game studies and game history. Newman noted
                     that having access to a GISST-like system would remove the need to engage in
                     extended descriptions of game play or game scenes. If a citation is also a
                     playable instance, he could rely on the reader to play what he was talking
                     about, and then focus his time on deeper analysis instead of front-loading
                     arduous amounts of descriptive text to set up his points. 
                  Newman suggested that being able to refer to a persistent recording or
                     savestate would give him increased confidence in writing more detailed analyses
                     of sequences of gameplay and would, hopefully, alleviate some of the need for
                     description in favour of close commentary and annotation. 
                  Denson concurred, stating that arguments can [now] be
                        illustrated directly (through video, for example) and even mounted through
                        hands-on engagement (gameplay) rather than merely discursive
                        description.
                  
                  The second major thread in the responses highlighted the tools’ implicit
                     effects on game preservation and the organization of game history. Some viewed
                     the tools as an argument for more robust digital repositories able to handle
                     and retrieve executable content. One noted that the tools displayed the power
                     of centralizing documentation about games and how the coordination of tools
                     could foster new expressions through the linkages of different technologies. In
                     this case, the concordance of emulation, documented citation, and gameplay
                     videos invited a discussion of the need for coherent underlying infrastructure
                     to support preservation of those outputs. Lowood agreed, saying that the tools
                     put issues around documentation, archiving and gameplay
                        preservation front and center. Glynn Edwards also focused on the
                     needs to create consistent metadata schemes for the emulated save states and
                     companion documentation. There was a general agreement among the preservation
                     professionals that the tools’ existence, in and of themselves, functioned as an
                     argument for better preservation practice, and they were excited to begin
                     working towards solutions.
                  Another small preservation note was that of the tools’ ability to allow for
                     quick validation of game files, and game data integrity. By ingesting an
                     executable into the system, one can easily check if it is compatible with a
                     specific emulator, and if it is actually the file it claims to be. Lowood also
                     noted that the tool could push repositories to negotiate better IP rights
                     access to executable software, or, at the very least, further reveal the need
                     for that work to be figured out (see footnote 25).
                  
               
               
                  8.2 Improvements and Future Work
                  Given the positive response to the work, most of the critical discussion of the
                     tools pointed solely to means of immediate improvement and new features. In the
                     main, many respondents wanted the tools to continue development of better UI
                     and user accessibility features. Right now, most of the ingestion apparatus
                     occurs on the command line, and Altice correctly felt that freeing the tool from dependence on the CLI would be necessary
                     since this would be a non-starter for many (most?)
                        scholars without a technical background. Many also pointed out that
                     while the technology had obvious potential, as noted in the last section, it
                     needed a set of coherent examples and illustrative case studies. The tools
                     represented more of a starting point for new discussions in game studies
                     and game preservation but were not really yet a solution (though with work they
                     could be). This appears to show that the tools are a ripe ground for future
                     work, as just making them more accessible and easier to use excited many of the
                     respondents. One even requested a basic tutorial for the current alpha
                     prototypes since they felt they required hands-on access to fully appreciate
                     the prototypes’ potential use cases. 
                  Another general request was for the inclusion of more emulators than the four
                     currently available to allow both for comparison of the emulators themselves,
                     and to help with further preservation questions in the description of the
                     configured environments needed to support game data. Many noted that the tools,
                     in both their analytic and preservation potential, pointed to uses outside of
                     games, and would be a boon for software studies and general software
                     preservation. This was edifying, since another thread of our overall thesis is
                     that most advances for game software history are also significantly applicable
                     to broader classes of software. 
                  Future work dovetailed with the requests for more system support and usability.
                     Many wanted to see what a larger, shared repository of game state citation
                     could afford, either in a classroom setting or for executable collections in
                     libraries and archives. There was also a call for more explanation of the
                     citation description formats, and perhaps even integration with current
                     scholarly citation tool sets like Zotero. Multiple respondents also mentioned
                     the potential for annotation tools to add voice overs to videos, and record and
                     remark on game play input traces. Gingold specifically was excited about the
                     ability to introspect on the running emulations, and visualize their system
                     dynamics and memory states, similar to our own thoughts on future work
                     above.
                  In closing, the responses to the tool essentially agree with the arguments
                     presented above. Respondents believed that embedded emulations represent a new
                     form of expression for game history, and that tools themselves function as an
                     argument for further work on technical system visualization, documentation
                     management, game citation, and preservation. We believe that this suitably
                     validates the tools, the methodologies they support, and theories behind them
                     in ways that not only legitimate them as contributions to multiple fields, but
                     as a starting point for more significant future work, and perhaps even future
                     research areas. 
               
            
            
               9 Conclusion
               At the beginning of this article, we argued that game and game performance
                  citation are underdeveloped, immature aspects of scholarly practice. This
                  proceeded through a more in-depth discussion of the purpose and functionality of
                  citation in both scholarly discourses in general, and towards the ways in which
                  games are a new and special case. As a result, the system we described to manage
                  and create playable manifest citations required not just novel engineering effort
                  but a theoretical consideration of the types of objects within and around games
                  that could be leveraged in arguments. The initial prototypes of the GISST system
                  actually preceded and evolved in dialogue with our new conceptualization of game
                     citation.Note that this is conceptualization of GISST as a system and not
                        conceptualization in the ontological sense. In attempting to
                  find ways to cite games, we incidentally were forced to create the technical means
                  for those citations, and to figure out how those citations could be made available
                  and useful for argumentation. This then contributed new means of historical
                  expression: we realized that the results of the citation system creation
                  represented a new general class of activity in the design of systems to support
                  game scholarship. The citation system is a central component of GISST because we
                  believe that citation work is a necessary precondition for a whole range of
                  possible tools for game history, game studies, and software studies works. 
               The citation work elaborated on a means for the manifest citation of new objects
                  into scholarly discourse, but it also supported those objects’ creation and
                  storage. As a result, this opened up those objects (performance videos, executable
                  game play, and indexed game states) to further analysis. In addition to
                  functioning as a form of reduction in supporting textual discourse, the objects
                  are also now organized and manipulable by any potential future extensions of
                  GISST’s toolset. As mentioned in Future Work above, this could mean input analysis
                  and replay of game play — a means to further look at instances of superplay
                  like speed running or glitch-hunting — and introspection on the game’s system
                  state and run-time memory. In tracking the needs for a citable base of games,
                  performance, and states, we have opened up a whole new set of resources and
                  opportunities for exploration and expression through scholarship. This provides
                  yet another example of how the stabilization of historical resources can lend
                  itself to new uses and articulations.
               GISST resolves many key issues in game citation, but more importantly it comprises
                  a compelling argument in the ongoing development of norms and standards in game
                  scholarship. It encodes in its database schema and user interface a view of what
                  it means to talk about a game or game performance in a recoverable, useful way
                  which is not prone to presupposition. It is an instance of the rhetorical approach
                  promoted by Ramsay and by Burdick et al: we contribute to
                     humanities theory by forging tools that quite literally embody
                     humanities-centered views regarding the world
                  .
            
         

            Acknowledgements
            The authors wish to thank Brandon Butler, Director of Information Policy at the
               University of Virginia Library, for help in the clarification of GISST’s potential
               legal context in endnote 23. This work was supported, in part, by Institute for
               Museum and Library Services grant LG-06-13-0205-13. 
         

            Appendix
            Figures below illustrate the interactive saved states.
            
            
               wolf3d_start. The initial player view upon loading the first level of
                  Wolfenstein 3D the player's weapon, a door and a dead body.
               
            
            
               first_barrel. One of the first interactive explosive barrels in Doom, waiting
                  to be shot by the player in Episode 1 Map 1 (E1M1).
               
            
            
               window_goo_lake. A view out of the first window in Doom, showing the
                  tantalizing prospect of a hidden armor upgrade in a lake of toxic goo.
               
            
            
               armor_plinth. A prominent armor upgrade resting on a plinth 
               
            
            
               nightmare_armor_plinth. The armor plinth is guarded by shotgun wielding baddies
                  on the Nightmare difficulty level.
               
            
            
               health_bonus_armor_room. Small health items located next to the initial armor
                  plinth.
               
            
            
               zig_zag_room. A zig zag platform room in E1M1 featuring a fireball shooting Imp
                  demon. 
               
            
            
               wall_secret. The first hidden wall secret in Doom, located in the zig zag room
                  and opened with a door opening command (generally space bar).
               
            
            
               lowered_imp_pillar. The secret platform in the zig zag room that is lowered
                  after exploring the next room. This grants access to the secret shotgun
                  room.
               
            
            
               shotgun_room. The hidden shotgun room adjacent to the zig zag room.
               
            
            
               elevator_secret. The hidden elevator in the corner of the shotgun room
                  lowering.
               
            
            
               secret_corridor_elevator_top. The hidden path at the top of the hidden elevator
                  in the shotgun room.
               
            
            
               secret_window. A hidden window at the end of the hidden path in Figure
                  14.
               
            
         
