Title:  An Annotated Multilingual Dataset to Study Modality in the Gospels
Volume:  018
Issue:  1
Date:  29 March 2024
Abstract:  
           This paper presents a number of resources for examining the expression of modality in the Gospels. The main resource is an XML-TEI 
               dataset that contains the linguistic annotation of a predefined list of potentially modal markers in both Ancient Greek and Latin. When 
               one of these markers conveys a modal meaning, each constituent of the modal passage (i.e., the marker, its scope, and the modal relation 
               between them) is annotated with a great level of detail through several linguistic features. One of the original features of our dataset 
               is the implementation of a cross-referencing system that enables the alignment of the potentially modal markers of both languages. To 
               facilitate the exploitation of our data by those unfamiliar with XML technologies, we also provide summary tables with the most relevant 
               features of the annotation. In addition, a program written in Apache Ant allows any user to generate the summary sheets and to align 
               modal passages in both Ancient Greek and Latin with any other language available in the Multilingual Bible Parallel 
               Corpus . This contribution presents the details of the semantic annotation and 
               its formalization, and how our resources may be exploited within semantics and translation studies. In addition, the encoding strategies 
               implemented are relevant for other projects dealing with the combination of multiple layers of (linguistic) annotation and/or tackling 
               the development of parallel corpora.
           
         
Full Body Text: 

         1 Introduction
           Parallel corpora are valuable resources for many linguistic fields — such as semantics, translation studies, and foreign language 
              teaching — as well as for the development of natural language processing (NLP) tasks. Moreover, in instances where languages share a 
              certain degree of similarity, semantic annotation carried out on the source text can often be transferred to the target languages 
              with minor adjustments. This holds in particular when the translations into a natural variety of the target language tend to be 
              literal.It is worth specifying that literal translations can override some of the rules of the target language, giving rise to 
              non-native-like uses. This case represents a special problem which is beyond the scope of this paper.  In this paper we present a 
              new resource for studying modality — a notoriously challenging field of semantics — by using the Latin translation of the Gospels by 
              Jerome of Stridon (c. 347–420) and its source text in Ancient Greek. It consists of a richly annotated dataset of modal 
              passages in both languages. The dataset allows for precise answers to specific research questions, such as whether modal markers with the 
              same modal meaning have been consistently translated by the same modal markers throughout the four Gospels (cf. Section 5). As 
              translations of the Bible usually keep the same subdivision into books, chapters, and verses (with small variations) and the verses are 
              numbered, our annotation can easily be reused for analyzing modality in other languages, in particular when languages are similar from a 
              structural point of view. Therefore, we have also set up tools to align the modal passages in both Ancient Greek and Latin with any other 
              language available in the Multilingual Bible Parallel Corpus 
              .
           
           The four Ancient Greek Gospels were composed at different times during the second half of the first century CE 
              (cf.  for Mark's Gospel;  for Matthew's Gospel; 
               for Luke's Gospel;  for John's Gospel). As the original 
              texts are lost, we need to rely on the manuscript tradition and on philological work. We used the best available online editions, the 28th 
              edition of the Novum Testamentum Graece (Nestle-Aland) for Ancient Greek and the 5th edition of the 
              Biblia Sacra Vulgata (Weber-Gryson) for Latin, though there were use restrictions. It is important to stress, however, that 
              we do not have the exact source text from which Jerome translated the Gospels, nor do we know exactly on which of the previous Latin 
              translations he based his revision work. Though we define the Ancient Greek text as the source text here, it must be specified that many 
              translations are not based directly on the Ancient Greek text, but on other translations from Ancient Greek. For example, especially in 
              the past, the Latin translation of the Bible by Jerome, the Vulgate, has often been used as the source text. 
              In fact, the first Italian translation of the Bible, the Malermi Bible (1471), was based on the 
              Vulgate.
           
           After having introduced the notion of modality and briefly described the annotation of the modal passages (Section 2), we outline the 
              workflow (Section 3) and the annotation scheme (Section 4). Then we show the results of our annotation of both the Latin text and the 
              Ancient Greek text. In doing so, we demonstrate how and to what extent annotation created in one language can be used as a basis to 
              annotate modal passages in another language. We also showcase the types of queries that can be carried out thanks to our fine-grained 
              annotation (Section 5), as well as the limitations of our dataset (Section 6). We conclude by suggesting directions for future research 
              (Section 7).
           
       

         2 Modality and Its Annotation
           The Ancient Greek/Latin dataset of the Gospels and its annotation was set up following the framework of the project, A 
              World of Possibilities: Modal Pathways Over an Extra-Long Period of Time: The Diachrony of Modality in the Latin Language (WoPoss). 
              The project's main aim is to study the evolution of modality in the Latin language (3rd c. BCE-7th c. CE) through setting up an annotated 
              diachronic corpus. The corpus is annotated automatically with regard to tokenization, lemmatization, PoS-tagging, morphological analysis, 
              and syntactic dependencies. It is also annotated manually with regard to the semantics of the modal passages (see sections 3 and 4). The 
              Vulgate has been selected to be part of the WoPoss corpus because of its cultural and linguistic influence 
              over the centuries beyond the Latin language. However, this choice has forced us to also take the Ancient Greek source text into account. 
              The sub-project described here does not focus on diachrony, but on the relationship between the Ancient Greek Gospels and the Vulgate 
              Gospels.
           
           In simplified terms, we define modality as the expression of necessity, possibility, and volition 
              . We follow a basic division of the modal domain into three main types: dynamic, deontic, and 
              epistemic modality. The first refers to possibilities and necessities internal to the main participant in the state of affairs (henceforth 
              SoA) or inherent in the SoA. The second type refers not only to permissions, obligations, and similar notions, but also to the stance of the 
              speaker towards the moral acceptability of an SoA. Finally, the third type refers to the stance of the speaker towards a propositional 
              content in terms of likelihood. Each type is subdivided into subtypes, as outlined in the WoPoss Guidelines for the 
              Annotation of Modality .
           
           In order to study its synchronic uses and its evolution over time, guidelines for a fine-grained semantic annotation of the relevant 
              passages (i.e., the passages featuring modal markers) were devised . It is worth mentioning that for 
              Ancient Greek and Latin we focused on lexical and morphological markers of modality, not on verbal moods. The choice could have been 
              different for other languages, but this issue is beyond the scope of this paper. With reference to Ancient Greek and Latin, we annotated 
              modal verbs, adjectives, nouns, adverbs, and some modal suffixes, such as Ancient Greek -tos and 
             Latin -bilis, expressing possibility.
           
           The annotation of a modal passage starts with the identification of the modal marker (e.g., Ancient Greek 
              dúnamai can), its syntactic scope, and the type of modality, or modal relation, as 
              illustrated by the following example.Linguistic glosses follow the Leipzig Glossing Rules 
              (https://www.eva.mpg.de/lingua/pdf/Glossing-Rules.pdf).
           
           (1) MT 7.18:
           
             A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit [...] (English translation from 
               Multilingual Bible Parallel Corpus).
               
                 ou
                 dúnatai
                 déndron
                 agathòn
                 karpoùs
                 poneroùs
                 poieîn [...]
               
               
                 not
                 can.3ꜱɢ
                 tree
                 good
                 fruit.ᴘʟ
                 bad.ᴘʟ
                 do.ɪɴꜰ
               
           
           In this case, dúnatai can.3sg is the modal marker, its scope is karpoùs 
              poneroùs poieîn bring forth evil fruit, and the modal type is dynamic situational possibility (i.e., that type of 
              possibility referring to a situation, not to a specific participant in the SoA).The labelling of the modal types largely relies on 
              the theoretical framework. We will not go into details here, but a comprehensive overview of modal types and subtypes is described in our  
              annotation guidelines . It is worth noting that the WoPoss annotation combines the annotation of types of 
              modality with other features of the modal passages. As a result, the analysis does not rely entirely on the intuition of the annotator, 
              but on a combination of different levels of analysis (see below in this section). For both the marker and its scope, the annotator 
              specifies whether there is a negation scoping over them (negative/positive polarity)For more details about the annotation of 
              polarity, see Section 4 and, in particular, Note 10. and identifies the sentence type as either non-interrogative or interrogative. 
              The scope of the marker is also annotated with respect to the semantics of the featured event (i.e., the SoA). The annotator describes 
              whether or not the event is dynamic (i.e., it involves a change) and whether or not there is control (i.e., someone or something has some 
              control over the unfolding of the event). The annotator identifies the main participant in the SoA and specifies whether they are animate 
              or inanimate. Only in the case of passive verbs does the annotator indicate whether there is also an undergoer (annotated with the label 
              patient by default). As modal markers are often ambiguous, the annotator can provide more than one annotation for the same passage 
              or feature. For examples of annotated modal passages, see .
           
           Though our list of modal markers covers all relevant parts of speech (verbs, adjectives, nouns, adverbs, and even morphological suffixes), 
              it is worth specifying that other words could have been considered to be modal markers in other frameworks. It must be stressed that such a 
              predefined list was not prepared for Ancient Greek. We first looked for the correspondences with the annotated Latin modal passages and 
              annotated those passages. This provided us with a list of potentially modal markers in Ancient Greek as per our theoretical framework. We then 
              searched for the occurrences of these Ancient Greek markers throughout the whole text, and we annotated the missing modal passages. 
           
       

         3 Workflow
           Plain text versions of the Gospels in Latin and Ancient Greek were retrieved from the resource 
             https://www.academic-bible.com/ , 
              maintained by the German Bible Society, which provides free access to online editions of the Bible in different languages and 
              which gave us their agreement. This source was selected for the high philological quality of the editions, as explained above. These files 
              were then automatically annotated using the NLP library for Python StanzaThis workflow follows the same main steps as any other text 
              annotated in the framework of the WoPoss project (see ), except for the alignment of 
              potentially modal markers., developed by the StanfordNLP research group . The Latin version was annotated with 
              the model trained with the Perseus treebank  and the Ancient Greek Gospels were annotated by 
              implementing the model trained with the PROIEL treebank . The result was CONLL-U files that 
              include the annotation of the lemmas, part-of-speech categorization, morphological features, and syntactic dependencies, as noted in Section 
              2. The linguistically annotated files were uploaded to the annotation platform INCEpTIONFor a description of the customization of this 
              tool to implement the WoPoss annotation scheme, see .  in order to 
              proceed with the semantic manual annotation as explained in Section 2. In addition, the automatic linguistic annotation was manually 
              corrected, but only with respect to the tokens inside a modal passage.
           
           An annotator carried out the linguistic annotation of a Gospel in each of the two languages. The Latin version was annotated according to the 
              annotation guidelines of the WoPoss project , and then the annotator carried out the linguistic annotation of 
              the equivalent Greek passages. The annotation was then reviewed by the PI of the project. Missing modal passages in the Greek text were 
              retrieved (as explained in Section 2) and annotated.
           
           After the revision process for the manual annotations was over, the annotated texts were exported to the UIMA CAS XMI format.INCEpTION 
              depends on an Unstructured Information Management Architecture (UIMA) engine. The INCEpTION export format we post-process is an 
              XMI serialization form of UIMA Common Analysis Structure (UIMA CAS XMI). The files were then transformed into XML-TEI using a 
              specifically tailored XSLT transformation developed by us. Typographical conventions were transformed into the semantically pertinent TEI 
              elements. For example, square brackets used in the source edition to indicate superfluous contents, likely due to interpolations, were 
              enclosed in the TEI element <surplus>.See 
              https://tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/ref-surplus.html. 
              During the manual annotation process, contributors could leave different kinds of comments in a field labeled note. These comments 
              might concern tokenization issues (as the annotation platform does not allow modification of the textual content of each token) or the 
              annotation itself (e.g., implicit linguistic contents that are crucial to the understanding of the modal passage). The contents of this field 
              were manually evaluated one by one and the required modifications were implemented.
           
           The chapter structure and verse segmentation of the Greek and Latin versions are not exactly the same, but the differences are not numerous. 
              This is why we were able to implement a semiautomatic alignment of the modal markers by using their location as the main point of reference. 
              This alignment consisted of creating a correspondence between markers in both languages by a system of unique identifiers and URIs.
           
           After carrying out the alignment of markers between Ancient Greek and Latin, there were some cases of non-aligned elements in one of the two 
              texts. This means that for one of the languages no marker was annotated at that same location (verse number). This lack of a counterpart can 
              be due to either 1) the nonexistence of that verse in the other version due to the differences in the Gospels tradition for that language 
              (see Section 1); or, more frequently, 2) an inexact correspondence between the two languages.
           
           We then performed an automatic identification of the verses using the same system as in the Multilingual Bible Parallel 
              Corpus Project. We manually corrected the errors caused by differences in chapter division and verse segmentation between our 
              reference edition and the Multilingual Bible Parallel Corpus. Our source texts are not open access, and we 
              therefore have publication constraints. We have reached an agreement with the German Bible Society to publish only annotated 
              verses, together with no more than the three preceding verses and the three following verses. It is worth stressing that for this reason the 
              verses which were not pertinent were deleted before publication. Table 1 presents the percentage of each work (using the number of words as 
              reference unit) made available in our dataset.
           
           
             Published contents and presence of semantic annotation (% of words of the complete work).
               
                 
                 Ancient Greek (GRC)
                 Latin (LA)
               
               
                 
                 Published
                 SemanticallyAnnotated
                 Published
                 SemanticallyAnnotated
               
               
                 Gospel of Matthew
                 74.91%
                 3.95%
                 71.52%
                 3.93%
               
               
                 Gospel of Mark
                 67.02%
                 4.61%
                 64.86%
                 4.53%
               
               
                 Gospel of Luke
                 75.55%
                 4.27%
                 72.05%
                 4.23%
               
               
                 Gospel of John
                 66.11%
                 4.37%
                 68.24%
                 4.55%
               
           
       

         4 Description of the Dataset
           The dataset consists of an XML-TEI file for each Gospel and each language containing the linguistic annotation of modal passages (and 
              potentially modal passages that have been analysed as non-modal). We also provide two summary tables with the most relevant features of the 
              semantic annotation and two processing tools: one to generate the summary tables and one to align the semantic analysis with verses in any 
              other language, if the source file is downloaded from the Multilingual Bible Parallel Corpus (or if it follows 
              the same identification system for the verses). Further details about these materials are given at the end of this section. The work is made 
              available through a GitHub and a Zenodo repository .
           
           A customization of the TEI schema was developed in order to account for the issues specific to the project. This customization was formalized 
              using ODD, a TEI XML-conformant specification format that allows one to customize TEI P5 in a literate programming 
              fashion . The ODD file and its resulting Relax-NG schema (with embedded schematron rules) are 
              freely available .
           
           The TEI P5 Guidelines present different methods of annotating linguistic information, but they can be summed up in two ways: 
              1) inline annotation, by using structural elements like <s> (sentence), <cl> (clause), or 
              <w> (word), and attributes such as @lemma (lemma) and @pos (part of speech) to linguistically 
              describe each word; and 2) stand-off annotation, generally formalized by implementing the Feature Structures module 
              . We have implemented a mixed approach, as is described below.
           
           The <teiHeader> (TEI header) contains the main metadata of each file. Besides the reference to the source text, 
              it contains the names of the annotators and the reviewer of the linguistic annotation of modal passages. In addition, it contains the 
              element <extent> (extent) to describe the total number of words that the text contained before we deleted the contents 
              we were not allowed to publish. Each chapter is contained in a <div> (text division) element.
           The Latin edition of the Gospels does not contain any punctuation marks, so the results of the automatic sentence segmentation were 
              erroneous. In the Greek text, certain punctuation marks generated errors as well (for example, the raised dot was never properly tokenized). 
              Considering these issues, we decided to enclose each verse in an <s> element, even though the exact correspondence between 
              a sentence and a verse was not always one-to-one. An @n (number / label) attribute allows us to know the verse 
              numberThis attribute is necessary because we cannot rely on calculated positions since our files do not contain the complete work due 
              to the aforementioned publication restrictions. according to the source edition (see line 1 in Figure 1). In addition, an 
              @id attribute implements the same identification system as the Multilingual Bible Parallel Corpus, 
              which enables the alignment between the two projects (see line 1 in Figure 1).
           
           Each word is enclosed in a <w> element and each punctuation mark in a <pc> (punctuation character) 
              element. Every word has a @lemma and a @pos attribute. The annotation of words that belong to modal passages has 
              been manually corrected, but in the other case, the contents of @lemma and @pos are the uncorrected results of 
              automatic annotation. In addition to those two attributes, words inside modal passages contain an @msd (morpho-syntactic 
              description) attribute that points to a feature structure (<fs> element) with a complete morpho-syntactic description 
              (e.g., gender, number, tense, mood; see line 14 in Figure 1, with resolved key in Figure 2).
           
           Every component of a modal passage is enclosed in the element <seg> (arbitrary segment; see lines 10-13 in Figure 1). An 
              attribute @function (function) describes the role of the segment with four possible values: modal marker, its scope, its 
              negation (if any), or participant in the state of affairs. The segments concerning the participants and the negation elements have a 
              @corresp (corresponds) attribute that points to the scope of the modal marker, in the case of the participant (see line 10 in 
              Figure 1), and to the modal marker, or, in specific cases, to its scope, in the case of negation.The negation particle whose scope is a 
              modal marker is systematically annotated. In a situation where the scope of a modal marker is under the scope of a negation, the negation is 
              annotated only if it is not part of the same syntactic unit as the scope. Let us consider the following passage: 
              Existimante autem populo et cogitantibus omnibus in cordibus suis de Iohanne ne forte ipse esset Christus 
              (Luke 3.15), which translates to And as the people were in expectation, and all men mused in their hearts of John, 
              whether he were the Christ, or not (translation provided by the Multilingual Bible Parallel Corpus). The 
              subordinate clause that contains the modal marker, the adverb forte (maybe, perhaps) and its scope, 
              ipse esset Christus, is introduced by the negative conjunction ne. As 
              this negative conjunction introduces the indirect question, it is linked to the scope of the modal marker. When the negation is part of the 
              same syntactic unit as the scope of the marker, we describe the negative polarity of the scope (as a feature structure) without annotating 
              the negation element itself. The <seg> elements concerning potentially modal markers and their scope (in the case of 
              modal markers) contain an @ana (analysis) attribute that points to an <fs> element with a complete 
              description according to the features explained in Section 2. The following aspects are described: whether the potential marker is indeed 
              modal and pertinent and, if that is the case, its polarity and type of utterance. In the case of the scope of a modal marker, besides 
              specifying its polarity and type of utterance, the state of affairs is described in terms of dynamicity, control, and type of participant 
              (whether there is a participant or not, and, if there is, whether this is explicit or implicit and then its type). Markers and their scopes 
              may be discontinuous. In these cases, the @ana attribute points to the same description, and a @part attribute 
              with the value Y (yes) indicates that the element is fragmented. In Figure 1, we can see a discontinuous scope 
              (trade-... in manus hominum; lines 15, 21-25) and a marker annotated as discontinuous to avoid overlap. 
              The marker is -ndus est, and due to the word boundary of tradendus, we 
              cannot annotate it with only one <seg> element.
           
           
             Inline annotation of a verse in the Latin text (Matthew 17.22).
               
           
           At the end of each file, there is the list of all the <fs> elements with four different types: morphological descriptions, 
              markers, scopes, and modal relations. The first three have already been tackled in the above description because there are internal 
              references to them from the text (see figures 2 and 3 for examples). The modal relations contain the features that describe the type of 
              modality. Besides describing a relation to a major type of modality (i.e., deontic, dynamic, or epistemic), it is mandatory to indicate the 
              identifier of both the modal marker and its scope. There is an <fs> element for each modal relation (see Figure 4 for 
              an example). In the case of a modal passage where multiple modal readings are possible, there is an <fs> element for each 
              different interpretation.
           
           
             Feature structure that describes the morpho-syntactic description of the word tradendus (Figure 1, 
                lines 14-17).
               
           
           
             Feature structure that describes the modal marker from Figure 1, lines 16-20.
               
           
           
             Feature structure that describes the modal reading of the verse presented in Figure 1.
               
           
           The model of the different feature structures is described in a Feature System Declaration (FSD) . This 
              declaration presents the different features and values that are possible depending on the type of feature structure, together with specific 
              constraints . It has helped us model the linguistic annotation within a very restrictive schema. For 
              example, we can declare that, if a modal relation is of the epistemic type, then it must include the degree feature defined 
              with a controlled vocabulary. The FSD is processed using XSLT to create a series of Schematron constraints that are then added to the ODD 
              file.For the processing of FSD into Schematron, see .
           
           The relationship between the Ancient Greek and Latin texts is established at the level of the modal marker (<seg> 
              element). An identifier is given to the marker in one of the languages (@xml:id) and then the corresponding reference is 
              added to its counterpart in the other language through the attribute @synch.This use might force the semantics of the 
              attribute @synch, but other projects have also used it to establish parallel relationships between works; see, as an example, 
              . The attribute @corresp could be a better candidate due to its 
              lax semantics, but, as is explained in this section, it is already being used to establish internal relationships between a negation and 
              its scope, as well as between the participant in a state of affairs and the scope of a modal marker. In the few cases in which there 
              is no correspondence, then the @synch attribute is added to the <s> element, so we can easily retrieve the 
              complete verse for a close reading of these cases.
           
           The Gospels of Luke, Matthew, and Mark are known as the synoptic Gospels because they contain several of the same stories, sometimes 
              transmitted with similar or even identical wording. Kurt Aland enumerates the synoptic passages, and using this work as a reference, we 
              provided each group of synoptic passages with an identifier . In this way, the affected verses are recognized 
              across the different Gospels thanks to the attribute @type that points to these relations of parallelism (see line 1 of 
              Figure 1).
           
           The folder summary contains two tabular sheets. One of them, modal_passages.tsv, contains all the modal passages in each 
              Gospel, aligning the Ancient Greek and the Latin text. It includes 1) the modal marker in both languages (when available); 2) the 
              contents of the verse that contains the modal markers in both languages; 3) features to describe the modal marker (whether it is implicit, 
              the type of utterance, and its polarity); 4) features to describe the scope of the marker (the type of utterance and its polarity, whether 
              there is an SoA and, if there is, its description in terms of dynamicity and control); 5) features to describe the modal reading (whether 
              it is ambiguous and thus receives more than one modal reading, the modal type and its different subcategorizations according to the 
              theoretical framework, and whether it has a rhetoric or pragmatic use); 6) the identification of the synoptic passage; 7) the ID of the 
              modal marker in the XML file; 8) the Gospel in which is located; and 9) the number of the verse following the 
              Multilingual Bible Parallel Corpus. The other file, potentially_modal_markers.tsv presents the list of 
              all potentially modal markers, with both languages aligned, including, as in the previously described file, features 1, 2, 7, 8, and 9. 
              Concerning the description of potentially modal markers, the file also contains two pieces of information: 1) whether the marker is 
              pertinent or not (that is, whether it is a modal marker); and 2) whether the marker is implicit.
           
           The XQuery code that produces both tabular sheets is available in the folder scripts, and it can be run through an Apache Ant program by 
              running the command ant analysis. In addition, we also provide an option to create tabular sheets aligning our semantic analysis of 
              Greek and Latin with any other language. The source files can be downloaded from the Multilingual Parallel 
              Bible Project, and they need to be included in the folder to-be-aligned. Then the program is launched by running the command 
              ant align. The result is a table with a simplification of modal_passages.tsv in which the verses in Ancient Greek and 
              Latin are presented along with the verse that contains the modal marker in any of the selected languages.
           
       

         5 Data Exploration
           One of the studies that can be carried out thanks to our corpus is the examination of the translation of potentially modal markers from 
              Ancient Greek into Latin. For instance, we can retrieve one-to-one equivalents in order to create simple glossaries (Table 2) or, for 
              example, focus on the markers with a modal meaning that have more than one different translation in Latin (Table 3) and thus explore lexical 
              diversity within the modal context.
           
           
             Potentially modal markers in Ancient Greek with a single translation in Latin that matches the predefined list of potentially modal 
                   markers for Latin.
               
                 Lemma of the PotentiallyModal Marker (GRC)
                 Lemma of the Translation (LA)
               
               
                 adunatéō
                 impossibilis est
               
               
                 adúnatos
                 impossibilis est
               
               
                 adúnatos eimí
                 impossibilis est
               
               
                 anéndektos eimí
                 impossibilis est
               
               
                 anánkēn ékhō
                 necesse habeo
               
               
                 ára
                 forte
               
               
                 boúlomai
                 volo
               
               
                 dúnamai
                 possum
               
               
                 dunástēs
                 possum
               
               
                 emós eimí
                 meus est
               
               
                 ékson eimí
                 licet
               
               
                 exousía
                 potestas
               
               
                 thélēma
                 voluntas
               
               
                 ísōs
                 forsitan
               
               
                 pepeisménos
                 certus
               
               
                 prépō
                 decet
               
               
                 -sómenos
                 -turus
               
               
                 -téos
                 -ndus
               
           
           
             Potentially modal markers in Ancient Greek with more than one translation in Latin.
               
                 Modal Marker in GRC
                 LA Translation
               
               
                 ádikos
                 iniquus
               
               
                 Not preselectedThis means that the translation does not match a lemma contained in the predefined 
                       list of potentially modal markers.
               
               
                 anánkē
                 necesse est
               
               
                 Not preselected
               
               
                 deî
                 debeo
               
               
                 necesse est
               
               
                 oportet
               
               
                 dúnamis
                 -bilis
               
               
                 potestas
               
               
                 Not preselected
               
               
                 dunatós eimí
                 possibilis est
               
               
                 possum
               
               
                 volo
               
               
                 éxesti
                 licet
               
               
                 Not preselected
               
               
                 exousían ékhō
                 potestas
               
               
                 potestatem habeo
               
               
                 ékhō
                 habeo + inf.
               
               
                 possum
               
               
                 Not preselected
               
               
                 thélō
                 nolo
               
               
                 volo
               
               
                 Not preselected
               
               
                 iskhúō
                 possum
               
               
                 valeo
               
               
                 Not preselected
               
               
                 méllō
                 -ndus est
               
               
                 -turus
               
               
                 -turus est
               
               
                 Not preselected
               
               
                 mḗpote
                 forte
               
               
                 Not preselected
               
               
                 opheílō
                 debeo
               
               
                 Not preselected
               
               
                 khreían ékhō
                 debeo
               
               
                 necesse habeo
               
               
                 opus est
               
               
                 Not preselected
               
               
                 -tos
                 -bilis
               
               
                 possum
               
               
                 Not preselected
               
           
           As we saw above, there is not always a one-to-one correspondence between the source text and the target text. There can be various reasons 
              for this (see Section 3). In some cases, we find a marker in Latin, where this is implicit in Greek. In the following example we see that 
              Ancient Greek does not use any verb to express the idea that new wine must be put into new bottles, while Latin and English use modal verbs  
              (debeo and must, respectively) and passive infinitives 
              (mitti and be put, respectively).
           
           (2) Mark 2.22
           
           
             But new wine must be put into new bottles (English translation from Multilingual Bible 
               Parallel Corpus).
               
                 all'
                 oînon
                 néon
                 eis
                 askoùs
                 kainoús.
                 
                 
               
               
                 sed
                 vinum
                 novum
                 in
                 utres
                 novos
                 mitti
                 debet
               
               
                 But
                 wine
                 new
                 in
                 bottle.ᴘʟ
                 new.ᴘʟ
                 be.put
                 must
               
           
           Note, moreover, that the syntax of both Ancient Greek and Latin is more flexible than English syntax, so the wordings in Greek and Latin are 
              already perfectly aligned.
           
           As suggested at the beginning of this paper, the dataset allows for precise answers to complex questions because it is possible to combine 
              lexical and semantic information. With regard to the question of whether modal markers expressing the same type of modality are consistently 
              translated by the same markers, we find that there is a tendency to use the same markers, though not in a rigid way. See Table 4 for an 
              illustration of the situation for the subtype permission, and Table 5, which illustrates the situation for the subtype obligation. Both 
              subtypes belong to deontic modality — authority.
           
           
             Correspondences between the Ancient Greek source markers and the Latin target markers with regard to the expression of 
                permission (deontic modality — authority).  
               
                 
                 licet
                 Not Preselected
                 oportet
                 possum
                 Total
               
               
                 deî
                 
                 
                 1
                 
                 1
               
               
                 dúnamai
                 
                 
                 
                 1
                 1
               
               
                 éxesti
                 24
                 1
                 
                 
                 25
               
               
                 ékson eimí
                 1
                 
                 
                 
                 1
               
               
                 iskhúō
                 
                 
                 
                 1
                 1
               
               
                 Total
                 25
                 1
                 1
                 2
                 29
               
           
           
             Correspondences between the Ancient Greek source markers and the Latin target markers with regard to the expression of 
                obligation (deontic modality — authority).
               
                 
                 debeo
                 necesse est
                 oportet
                 Total
               
               
                 deî
                 
                 1
                 6
                 7
               
               
                 opheílō
                 3
                 
                 
                 3
               
               
                 Total
                 3
                 1
                 6
                 10
               
           
           Permission is expressed in the Ancient Greek Gospels by five markers. The translation tends to take into account the different source 
              markers, as only two Ancient Greek modal markers (dúnamai and iskhúō) 
              are rendered by one Latin modal marker (possum). It is worth noticing that 
              éxesti and the etymologically related construction ékson eimí are 
              consistently rendered by licet. The situation for obligation is similar, though in one passage the Latin 
              translation has introduced a third marker. It is beyond the scope of this paper to discuss the reasons for such slight discrepancies. The 
              point to be made here is that the dataset allows the user to highlight specific tendencies of the translation.
           
           The examples above show the type of information that can be retrieved from our dataset, through which linguists may gain new knowledge about 
              how modality is linguistically expressed in both languages. In addition to being a resource for scholars, our dataset can also be exploited 
              in a learning context. As we saw in tables 1 and 2, the creation of bilingual glossaries is very straightforward thanks to the 
              marker-to-marker alignment. Furthermore, this type of vocabulary list can directly be enriched not only with examples of these words in 
              context but also with a modern language translation of the examples thanks to the alignment with the Multilingual Bible 
              Parallel Corpus. It is also possible to design exercises to improve the reading skills of the learners.
           
           The semantic annotation may also be exploited as a means to improve learners' linguistic knowledge. The semantic annotation can easily be 
              explored with the aid of translations of the modal passages in modern languages in order to easily interpret the modal meaning of each 
              passage. Moreover, students can examine different semantic phenomena, such as semantic ambiguity (see Figure 5) or polysemy concerning modal 
              markers. For example, learners can compare the occurrences of modal markers that present different modal readings depending on the context, 
              evaluating for each marker which meanings are more or less frequent. Figure 6 shows markers that convey different types of modality, 
              excluding passages that received a double annotation due to ambiguity (cf. also ).
           
           
             Modal markers in Latin with ambiguous readings and frequency of the phenomenon.
               
           
           
             Modal markers in Latin that express more than one type of modality, excluding ambiguous readings.
               
           
           Our dataset can also be used to explore modality in a typological perspective thanks to the possibility to align the Ancient Greek and 
              Latin texts with the translations contained in the Multilingual Bible Parallel Corpus
              , which includes languages belonging to diverse linguistic families. Therefore, our 
              fine-grained annotation of the modal passages will provide researchers with new insights on the contextual uses of modal markers from a 
              cross-linguistic perspective. For the use of parallel corpora for typological research, see .
           
       

         6 Limitations
           As mentioned in Section 5, each file contains a reference to the complete word count of each Gospel. This allows us to obtain a number of 
              statistical measures, such as the relative frequencies of each marker. However, in order to perform other type of measures, such as the 
              specificity of a collocation, we would need to query one of the resources that provide a lemmatized version of the Gospels, such as 
              Bible Hub, although there could be textual differences between editions .
           
           Another limitation of our annotated dataset is the fact that we only annotate a precise list of markers (for the complete list in Latin, see 
              ; for the list in Ancient Greek, see tables 2 and 3), as outlined above (Section 2).
           
       

         7 Conclusion
           The linguistically annotated dataset presented in this paper comprises the four Gospels in both Ancient Greek and Latin. One of the novelties 
              of this project concerns the semantic annotation of modality, since the availability of corpora with this type of annotation is 
              scarce.Although notable exceptions do exist, like the project MODAL: Modèles de l’annotation de la modalité à 
              l’oral, led by Paola Pietrandrea . The annotation pipeline, including the 
              combination of automatic and manual annotation, together with the formalization of different layers of linguistic annotation, can be adapted 
              by other projects within the field of linguistics. Besides the annotation of modal passages, another original aspect of this dataset is the 
              formalization of one-to-one relations between both languages in regard to modal markers. The fine-grained linguistic annotation of this 
              dataset opens up a number of research paths that can be followed, either to carry out monolingual analyses or to tackle contrastive 
              linguistics research.
           
           A closely related schema for the semantic annotation of modality has been successfully applied in the complete WoPoss 
              Modality Corpus, available at https://woposs.unine.ch. In addition, the strategies to 
              connect semantic annotation across languages can be implemented in other parallel corpora to align specific linguistic descriptions.
           
           Section 5 illustrates several possible applications of this dataset. The dataset is formalized in TEI, and our annotation schemas are well 
              documented, thus increasing the usability of the dataset for the scientific community, as well as within a pedagogical context. To facilitate 
              its exploitation, part of the analytical data is presented in tabular sheets. In addition, the internal references shared with the project 
              Multilingual Bible Parallel Corpus enables a straightforward link to this other resource, which can be 
              especially relevant for teaching purposes. A program is provided to facilitate the alignment between our semantic annotation in Ancient 
              Greek and Latin and any of the documents from the Multilingual Bible Parallel Corpus.
           
       

         Funding
           This work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation [PP00P1_176778, PP00P1_214102 to FDO].
           
       

         Acknowledgements
           We would like to thank Thomas von Kaenel and Séverine Reymond for their contributions to the annotation task.
           
       

         Author Contributions
           This paper was written collaboratively. H. Bermúdez-Sabel is mainly responsible for sections 3, 4, 5 (learning applications), 
              6, and 7. F. Dell’Oro is mainly responsible for sections 1, 2, 5 (translation, linguistic typology), and the general scientific 
              supervision. H. Bermúdez-Sabel contributed to this paper as a Swiss National Science Foundation post-doctoral 
              researcher.
           
       
