Title:  Playing with Identities: Queering Digital Narratology and the
                    Exploration of Gender and Sexual Identities
Volume:  011
Issue:  3
Date:  26 September 2017
Abstract:  
                
                 This study builds upon previous research that discusses gender and sexual
                    identities and digital narratives by introducing a queer narratological approach
                    to character creation mechanics. First, Lisa Nakamura’s identity tourism and
                    narratological constructs are applied to formalize the concept of the
                    exploration in digital narratives. Second, exploration of gender and sexual
                    identities is demonstrated through a queer narratological analysis of two
                    digital narratives, Always Sometimes Monsters
                    (2014) and Hustle Cat (2016). Third, the
                    development of character creation mechanics in The
                        Sims (2000-2016) series is examined to reflect the advancement
                    toward progressive game designs. Concerns regarding a sexuality blind approach
                    and the downplaying of homophobia are addressed, and Helene Cixous’s
                    poststructuralist other bisexuality as
                    a transgressive product of the fluidity of identities in digital narratives is
                    emphasized. This study elaborates the often-disregarded workings of queer
                    narratology and theory in digital narratives or game designs.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                
                    
                        [A]nd if any should like the
                            world I have made, and be willing to be my subjects, they may imagine
                            themselves such, and they are such, I mean, in their minds, fancies or
                            imaginations; but if they cannot endure to be subjects, they may create
                            worlds of their own, and govern themselves as they please.
                        
                    
                
                So ends Margaret Cavendish, the Duchess of Newcastle’s The
                        Description of a New World, Called The Blazing World first published
                    in 1666 and, as can be seen, the idea of imagining into existence a world of
                    one’s own through narrative is no novel one. In the digital age, however,
                    digital narratives give their readers or players an extra degree of freedom to
                    imagine and explore in narrative worlds with the interactivity that is
                    introduced. This article focuses on how digital narratives allow their players
                    to explore their gender and sexual identities. Research for this project
                        was done with funding from the Australian Government Research Training
                        Program Scholarship.
                Previous studies on sexuality and video games often quote Bastal 
                    , a Dragon Age 2
                     player who posted on BioWare’s social forum, lamenting
                    vehemently over the video game designer’s choice to make the game so appealing
                    to women and gays, especially when he believes that female and queer gamers
                    occupy less than 10 percent of the entire gaming population. In less than 12
                    hours, his first thread received 420 replies. The criticism of the inclusive
                    game design in the Dragon Age series continued,
                    however. Three years later, in June 2014, five months before the sequel, Dragon Age: Inquisition
                    , was released, another thread regarding the proposed
                    romance dynamics in the upcoming game and its frightful marginalizing
                    homosexuality was created by a player under the name of Duncaaaaaan:
                        I am white, straight, and male.
                            Are you upset by this, bioware? [sic] Am I wrong for being white and
                            straight and male? No, of course not, I didn't ask to be born this way
                            and to insult somebody for their race, gender and orientation is
                            extremely bigoted. … It looks to me that bioware [sic] is trying to
                            marginalize core gamers (men in their late teens and beyond) in favour
                            of getting the support of the LGBT community and women, in regards to
                            the character design and story.
                        
                     In less than three hours, the thread received 121 replies. The continued
                    criticism of major video game companies and their inclusion of
                    non-heteronormative practices reflect a resistance toward game designs that
                    challenge traditional gender roles and beliefs and attitudes toward sexual
                    orientations. This article examines the character creation designs of digital
                    narratives from a queer narratological perspective to propose that character
                    creation mechanics can situate the player in an environment where
                    heteronormativity is marginalized in favor of a poststructuralist understanding
                    of gender and sexuality, where players are given the freedom to explore their
                    gender and sexual identities.
                In digital narratives, the ability to play as multiple gender or sexual
                    identities has been seen as the liberation from an essentialist sexed body , evidence of inclusion by video game companies  or even an instance of sexuality blindness . But the narrative techniques and narratological
                    ideologies that underpin the relationship between sexuality and digital
                    narratives have rarely been studied. To study how digital narratives allow for
                    the exploration of the player’s gender and sexual identities, what exploration
                    is in cyberspace is first established. This is achieved by a review of how
                    identity tourism as a cybercultural construct has been discussed and can be
                    adapted to an understanding of exploration. The requirements for exploration to
                    occur in digital narratives are explicated. Then, the character creation
                    mechanics of two digital narratives in the form of a role-playing game (RPG),
                        Always Sometimes Monsters
                    , and visual novel, Hustle
                        Cat
                     are presented, and an analysis is offered on how
                    their designs allow for an exploration of gender identities and confront players
                    with multiple, conflicting sexual identities through the emergent non-linearity
                    and parallelism of plot structures. Subsequently, in light of the recent Gender Customization Options update to The Sims 4
                    , the changes in attitudes toward gender as reflected by
                    the modifications of character creation functions throughout the Sims franchise are discussed. The transgressive gender
                    and sexuality configurations produced by the designs of the digital narratives
                    are related to Hélène Cixous’s other
                        bisexuality to defend against claims of sexuality blindness or a
                    downplaying of the experiences of members of the queer community.
                Before proceeding, the specific usage of certain terms in this article — namely
                    sex, gender, gender identity and sexual identity — must first be clarified.
                    Adapted from GLAAD  and the American Psychological
                    Association , briefly, sex is viewed as more
                    biologically determined than gender, gender identity is understood to be an
                    experienced self that may or may not be different from the assigned sex, and
                    sexual identity is regarded as an orientation or sexual preference typically
                    toward a class of sex. There are significant differences between GLAAD’s
                        and the APA’s definition of one’s sexual orientation. GLAAD’s definition is
                        more general in that sexual orientation is seen as any attraction to another
                        person, whereas the APA’s definition specifies that said attraction be
                        toward a sex. Throughout this article, the reader, player and main
                    character of each narrative will be referred to in the third person because at
                    the heart of the argument in this article lies the conviction that within the
                    digital narrative environment, the reader, the player and main characters’
                    genders (and consequently sexualities) are made fluid by narratives that disturb
                    gender binaries.
                Research on on-screen bodies and their reaction with the interactor’s gender and
                    sexual identities has predominantly been involved with multi-user dungeons or
                    MUDs. These are typically text-based virtual worlds, where users engage in
                    synchronous interaction with other users and the virtual environment. Lisa
                    Nakamura  discusses netsex practices by white males who use
                    Asian stereotypes in their online fantasies. Gender and MUDs have been studied
                    extensively 
                    , and the features of MUDs that gave people over the
                    internet a chance to interact with new textual realities have been thoroughly
                    examined. Sherry Turkle’s  book-long study and
                    Shannon McRae’s  essay discuss the sexual experiences
                    and thoughts regarding gender and sexuality from interviews with users of MUDs.
                    The detailed qualitative data from both studies suggest that, having explored in
                    the virtual world of the MUD, users found their conceptions about themselves or
                    how sexuality works changed. 
                That the complicated depth of the virtual world of MUDs can be an environment
                    where users can explore their identities is not being contested. However,
                    membership in the online MUD community has declined. On 9 September 2017, I
                    visited one of the major MUDs, LambdaMOO, and found
                    that there was little activity — there were a total of 56 players, and only 7 of
                    which were marked as recently active. Research on digital media and sexual
                    experimentation and orientation need to now consider forms of more accessible
                    media. Both Turkle  and McRae  acknowledge that people who wish to enter an MUD need
                    some basic knowledge of coding or at least a willingness to learn it. That
                    digital narratives in the form of video games are much easier to install, engage
                    with and disseminate realize and amplify their exploratory function as a greater
                    gaming audience is reached. One of the key outcomes of the proliferation and
                    increased consumption of gaming content that encourages exploration is that the
                    needs of the traditional gamer demographic will be revised for the previously
                    marginalized gaming community. This will become even more evident as video game
                    companies begin to recognize that 
                        even heterosexual, traditionally
                            gendered gamers may want to play with sexuality and gender in video
                            games
                        
                    . Further, unlike single-player video games, the sexual encounters on MUDs
                    occur between players, and without any other players online to interact with,
                    experimentation would not be possible — which becomes problematic given the
                    declining MUD community. One of the primary differences between MUDs and the
                    video games studied in this article is that MUDs are more reliant on other
                    players than the author-created environment to form a narrative. In the digital
                    narratives discussed here, interaction with other players in-game is either
                    optional or impossible. Experimentation with gender identities and sexuality in
                    video games is studied as a result of the interaction between the player and a
                    more pre-determined narrative structure and environment.
                From Janet Murray’s  endorsement of a narratological
                    approach to video games to Gonzalo Frasca’s 
                    introduction of a ludological approach, there has been debate as to which
                    methodology and conceptual framework would be more appropriate for studying
                    video games. Oliver Laas’s chapter, Narratives in
                            Digital Games: Their Place and Function in the Study of Digital
                            Games, in Expanding Practices in
                            Audiovisual Narrative (2014) provides a good summary of the
                        narratological versus ludological debate. This article does not
                    intend to resolve the debate, but introduces yet another lens through which to
                    view video games — a queer narratological approach. Queer narratology was first
                    employed by Susan Lanser  in her seminal article,
                        Sexing the Narrative: Propriety, Desire, and the
                        Engendering of Narratology, and responds to the lack of attention
                    given to sexuality and queer identities in the study of narrative. She reads
                    Jeanette Winterson’s novel, Written on the Body,
                    and examines the omission of a protagonist’s sex and gender identity as a
                    narrative technique that prompts questions about the relationship between
                    narration and queer representations. The burgeoning discipline has been
                    gradually receiving more attention with Warhol and Lanser's edited collection
                        , but it is still evident that more has to be
                    said about how narrative theory and representations of queerness are
                    inextricably related. Mia Consalvo’s  landmark
                    study talks about how non-heteronormative sexualities are presented in the first
                        The Sims
                     game. Her findings, which will be discussed later, can
                    demonstrate the great changes that have happened over a decade after her study
                    to the portrayal of sexualities and gender identities in both The Sims series and other video games.
            

                Exploration and Identity Tourism
                Lisa Nakamura’s  identity tourism is where the
                    conceptualization of exploration in a digital context comes from. She first used
                    it as a metaphor to describe the
                        activity of racial identity appropriation, or passing in
                        cyberspace. Terms such as passing or identity tourism
                    have been used predominantly in discussions of racial identity, and in American
                    history, passing is associated with a 
                        discourse of racial difference
                            and especially with the assumption of a fraudulent white identity
                            by an individual culturally and legally defined as Negro or
                            black
                        
                    . Nakamura  notes that identity
                    tourism is often performed by men who seek netsex and can be a process by which users wear
                        racially stereotyped avatars without feeling racist. If we refer to
                    this as racial identity tourism, gender and sexual identity tourism is the act
                    of wearing different avatars of varying gender identities and sexualities. While
                    racial identity tourism has been understood in a negative light, Mimi Nguyen
                         has adapted the term to sexual
                    identities to show its transgressive capabilities. She argues that sexual
                    identity tourism renders the digital space into a liberatory space, disrupting the social determinism of
                        the body from the identifications of the self, where genders and
                    sexualities can be constructed and reconstructed by players at will through, for
                    example, character creation. Nguyen contributes to the already robust discussion
                    of how the digital space achieves poststructuralist philosophies of gender and
                    sexuality, but the exploratory element of identity tourism, ironically, has not
                    received much attention. In a study of users’ experiences on online MUDs,
                    Shannon McRae  notes that gender swapping in
                    virtual space can be motivated by a
                        sense of self-exploration, to see what sex is like from a different point of
                        view. Through this process, she continues, 
                        we can experience for ourselves,
                            inside ourselves, the kinds of things that we associate with female or
                            male, and realize that those aspects are not, after all, something Other
                            and outside of us
                        
                    . This act of exploring by identity touristing with the possibility of discovering things
                    previously unknown about the self forms the understanding of exploration in this
                    article.
                Nakamura’s metaphor of wearing an avatar is a starting point for discussing how the
                    exploration happens as a product of identity tourism. However, I argue that the
                    metaphor is insufficient to explain exploration because exploration is an
                    introspective process that requires players to go beyond wearing
                    other identities to being other identities. There must be a
                    temporary adoption of the digital body’s identity (the digital body as the
                    avatar or player-controlled character) by the real body such that the experience
                    of the digital body can be internalized by the real body and thus modify
                    players’ conceptions of themselves. Agency in a digital narrative has been seen
                    as what combines the real body and the digital body on-screen. Katherine Hayles
                         offers a description of this agency as
                    the alternation between top-down
                        approach to narrative in which the narrator spins a story, and the bottom-up
                        model of interactivity in which the user chooses how the story will be
                        told. This alternation forms what Dovey and Kennedy  would refer to as the cybernetic loop, that which makes it so that
                    the player and the game are
                        inseparable for the duration of the game and transforms the real
                    body of the player into a cyborg, a
                        subjectivity that depends precisely on this collapse of boundary between the
                        human and the machine. However, how it is that players can adopt the
                        identity of their character or avatar must also be
                    addressed.
                If a player is to experience a merge between the identities, then the player must
                        believe that such a merge can happen. Concepts such as
                    immersion, what Janet Murray  terms the
                        sensation of being surrounded
                        by a completely other reality, Roland Barthes’s 
                    the reality effect, and
                    realism in general are related to whether this belief is possible. The crux of
                    this issue is, however, whether players can believe that they are an Italian
                    plumber called Mario trying to save Princess Peach of Mushroom Kingdom. Despite
                    the sometimes large physical, psychological, or mental differences between the
                    real body and the digital body, the player can comfortably negotiate these
                    distances and assume the identity of a digital persona. Katherine Angel Cross
                         has cited pretend play, role playing, and
                    imagination as processes that occur when someone takes on a digital identity,
                    but Peter J. Rabinowitz’s  analysis
                    of narratological audiences provides a more structural approach to this
                    phenomenon. Rabinowitz states that there are four audiences: (1) actual audience
                    — the flesh-and-blood person who reads; (2) authorial audience — the
                    hypothetical reader for whom the author writes; (3) narrative audience — the
                    audience that accepts the fictional world in which the story happens; and (4)
                    ideal narrative audience — the audience by which the narrator, not the author,
                    wishes to be read. Only when players are able to become the appropriate
                    narrative audience — those willing to accept a reality in which they are
                    occupants in a digital, fictional world for the duration of the narrative — can
                    their players adopt the identities of their digital bodies. When the digital
                    body or world is so incompatible with the norms of players that they cannot or
                    refuse to believe they can adopt the identity of their digital body, their role
                    is then more like that of a voyeur controlling and observing an on-screen
                    subject. Pretend play, role play or imagination are then processes by which
                    Rabinowitz’s narrative audience is adopted. Unless players come to change their
                    mind about their digital presence or world, exploration cannot occur because
                    then the distance between the player and their avatar or character becomes so
                    great that the player is not being or even
                        wearing any digital identity.
                The ability to create a character in digital narratives cements the relationship
                    between the players and their digital bodies. Catherine Gallagher  makes some noteworthy observations about
                    the fictionality of characters in novels and the emotional attachment between
                    the character and the reader. Readers are attached to fictional characters not
                    in spite of their fictionality but precisely because of it — the fictional
                    setting establishes a protected
                        affective enclosure that [encourages] risk-free emotional
                    investment. That the personality exists only in the boundaries of the
                    narrative without extratextual
                        baggage means that the reader can be immersed in the experience,
                    identifying with and investing in only the presented individuals. A character’s
                        peculiar affective
                        force, Gallagher proposes, 
                        is generated by the mutual
                            implication of their unreal knowability and their apparent depth, the
                            link between their real nonexistence and the reader’s experience of them
                            as deeply and impossibly familiar
                        
                    . Gallagher is primarily referring to characters in novels, but the
                    players in creating their characters in digital narratives would seem to
                    strengthen their bonds toward them. First, by creating a character, one is
                    effectively responsible for its existence. In novels, according to Mieke Bal’s
                    character effect, the illusion of an identity is created. This identity is
                    conceivable only on the textual level as represented by the author. In digital
                    narratives, the character created is a product of both the agency of the player
                    and the author’s systems and rules so that the impenetrability of a character in
                    a novel is less applicable to a character in an electronic setting in which
                    players contribute to the presence of their on-screen personality.
                    The players personalize their characters in a way that renders them knowable
                    only to the players themselves, and the imaginary status of a character is no
                    longer imaginary because the players are able to identify parts of their
                    characters’ being as originating from themselves. This relationship between the
                    character and its creator helps situate the player within the narrative
                    audience, and the exploration of one’s identity can be seen as a capitalization
                    on the cyborgian inseparability of players and their creations.
            

                Exploring in Queer Worlds: Always Sometimes
                        Monsters and Hustle Cat
                Always Sometimes Monsters (henceforth ASM) was released in May 2014 by Vagabond Dog and has
                    since received over 1,000 reviews on Steam, most of which were very positive, and
                    awards for Best Writing and Best Indie Game from the Canadian Videogame Awards
                    in 2014 . The narrative starts with a
                    brief introductory sequence, after which there is a scene at a party where the
                    player selects the characters. Then, the game progresses one year in game time,
                    and the protagonist is shown to be living a life in squalor because of career
                    issues and, most importantly, because they broke up with their partner. The
                    protagonist receives an invitation to a wedding between this partner and someone
                    else, and the main conflict of the narrative and objective of the game is
                    presented — the protagonist must survive and pass through two cities to reach
                    the wedding ceremony to win their lover back with little funds to spare.
                    Depending on the players’ choices, and assuming that their character survives,
                    they are either successful or unsuccessful in stopping the wedding and getting
                    back with their partner.
                Character creation in ASM happens in the party
                    scene, where players control the host of the party and talk to the partygoers.
                    Whomever players make the host talk to becomes their avatar. 
                        Screenshot of the scene where the player selects a character. Circled
                            in red is the host that is controlled. Taken on May 19, 2016.
                        
                     Most of the characters seen in Figure 1,
                    besides the host, can be chosen to be the protagonist. After this selection
                    process, the player controls the protagonist and goes out onto the patio where
                    the lover of the protagonist can be selected. 
                        Screenshot of the scene where players select the lover of their
                            protagonist. Circled in red is the character that has been taken control
                            of. Taken on May 19, 2016.
                        
                     Again, most of the characters in Figure
                        2 can be selected as the protagonist’s lover, and after this the
                    player gives the protagonist and their lover names. The player is free to select
                    whatever sex the protagonist or the lover is but, at this point, the expressed
                    gender always corresponds to the assigned sex.
                Research on the player’s freedom to choose an avatar’s sex or gender has
                    discussed this as some form of resistance against the privileged, straight white
                    male gamer, or as a step toward a liberal feminist philosophy. Nielsen  argues that in some RPGs when the
                    characters’ sex or sexuality does
                        not directly hinder characters’ abilities in the game world, the
                    design of the game conforms to a liberal feminist ideology. This understanding
                    of sex and gender presupposes that gender identities are stable. Perhaps this is
                    because, in scholarship on video games, character creation is seen as a gameplay
                    element that occupies typically the starting sequences of a game, and
                    characters’ sex and gender are understood as subsequently fixed throughout the
                    rest of the game. However, each playable character in ASM is a tabula rasa distinguishable only by the appearance of
                    their avatar, and the choices the player makes to modify this character
                    throughout the narrative reminds us that character creation or characterization
                    is a continuous process. It was mentioned that the expressed gender in ASM corresponds to the assigned sex; however, in the
                    final sequence of the game, the wedding ceremony scene, the protagonist is able
                    to have a conversation with a transgender character. This character asks the
                    protagonist a question about their views on gender identity, to which the
                    protagonist may respond that they are transgender, their lover is transgender,
                    they find it gross or they
                    are fine with it. The
                    answer to this question does not affect the plot but can affect players’
                    conception of their protagonist’s gender identity both retroactively and for
                    every future read-through of the narrative. The introduction of a transgender
                    identity distinguishes sex from gender identities and provides players with the
                    opportunity to explore the gender identities generated from a permutation of
                    assigned sexes and experienced genders in a digital narrative. Gender identities
                    and characterization in general in digital narratives should be recognized as
                    fluid and continuously shaped by the narrative and the decisions made by players
                    if the full potential of exploration and identity tourism is to be examined.
                Hustle Cat was released in March 2016 by DateNighto
                    and has garnered 360 reviews on Steam, with an overall rating of 
                        very positive
                        
                    . Although it is an RPG, classifying it as a visual novel (not to be
                    confused with the graphic novel) would be more accurate. The visual novel
                    originated in Japan  but the manga/anime art style
                    seen predominantly in this genre has been adapted by Western cultures, as in
                        Hustle Cat; though there has been little
                    academic attention to this genre. Lebowitz and Klug  argue that only a handful of visual novels have been
                        released outside the country, but the genre is in fact quickly
                    gaining popularity outside of Japan. On Steam, there are over 700 games with a
                        Visual Novel tag . Lebowitz and
                    Klug  state that it is similar to the
                    choose-your-own-adventure style of narrative and that, most importantly, they don’t face the length restrictions
                        found in physical books. The large amount of branches and complex
                    plots in visual novels require large word counts that are more easily achievable
                    with a digital medium. In Marie-Laure Ryan’s  terms,
                    the visual novel, would be considered a playable story rather than a narrative game, but the visual
                    novel, as a digital product, is composed of more complex non-linear plots,
                    gameplay functions and audio-visual elements. In the visual novel, the reader is
                    told the narrative predominantly through text and there are junctions in the
                    narrative where the player must decide which option to choose (see Figure 3). The route and endings change according
                    to the choices. 
                        Screenshot of a narrative junction in Hustle
                                Cat. Taken on May 19, 2016.
                        
                     The protagonist of Hustle Cat is Avery
                    Grey, a young adult who takes a job at a cat café. It turns out that the café is
                    cursed by a spell that turns all its employees into cats when they leave the
                    café. How Avery breaks the curse for the employees at the café is the main
                    storyline. If Avery does not die, Avery always ends up with one of the
                    bachelors/bachelorettes at the café. As in many visual novels, experiencing how
                    the romance plays out with each of the bachelors/bachelorettes is one of the
                    main goals a reader has when approaching the narrative.
                Creating a character in Hustle Cat is restricted to
                    choosing what gender the character should be referred to as (Figure 4) and what picture image they have (Figure 5). 
                        Screenshot of character creation screen in Hustle
                                Cat. Taken on May 19, 2016.
                        
                    
                    
                        Screenshots from Hustle Cat of possible
                            portraits (below). The images during the main narrative (top) correspond
                            to the circled portraits. Taken on May 19, 2016.
                        
                     Although it is not made explicit, the portraits the reader may choose
                    from in Figure 5 suggest the choice of the
                    character’s sex. Physical features associated with a stereotypically female
                    body, long hair, breasts and skinnier arms, appear in the female version
                    of the character.
                Even though it is ambiguous as to whether the sex of the character can be chosen,
                    it is clear that there is a distinction between physical appearance and
                    expressed gender identity. This is executed more explicitly than it is in ASM, and the rare inclusion of the third-person
                    pronouns to refer to the protagonist in a digital narrative establishes the
                    equality of the multiple gender identities. Whereas from a feminist
                    narratological perspective, Ruth E. Page 
                    argues that ambiguous characterization
                        [challenges] the reader’s notion of gender as a stable, defining feature of
                        a character’s identity, in this case the reverse is true. The
                    unambiguous assignment of a character’s expressed identity, which may or may not
                    differ from their physical appearance, makes it explicit that a notion of stable
                    binary gender identities is incongruous with the design of this digital
                    narrative. The ability to mix and match sexed bodies and gender identities is
                    what allows the reader to explore how each combination elicits a different
                    response toward their own conception of gender identities. Further, upon closer
                    inspection of Figure 4, underneath the selection
                    of pronouns, it reads You can change
                        this mid-game if you like. While reading Hustle
                        Cat, the reader can open the options menu to change what pronoun
                    they would like their character to be referred to. From a game design point of
                    view, switching pronouns is not difficult because of the text-based nature of
                    the visual novel. However, the effortlessness of changing the character’s
                    expressed gender on the reader’s part makes Hustle
                        Cat the epitome of a digital narrative that encourages exploration
                    of gender identities. Even when the reader does not wish to change pronouns, the
                    knowledge that they can always do so throughout the narrative continuously asks
                    readers whether they are comfortable with the gender identity they experience
                    on-screen. Not answering this question is in itself a response that reaffirms
                    one’s current gender identity. It is from this question-and-answer feedback loop
                    that the exploration of gender identities can occur.
                How character creation allows for the exploration of gender identities has been
                    discussed as predominantly the result of readers’ ability to adopt an array of
                    gender identities. When gender identity is not fixed, however, sexual
                    orientation cannot be fixed as well. How character creation mechanics, in
                    creating parallel worlds and influencing the temporality of the plot, confronts
                    the reader with multiple sexual identities is now examined.
                Susan Lanser’s  study, Sexing the
                        Narrative, as mentioned earlier, reads Jeanette Winterson’s Written on the Body from a queer narratological
                    perspective. Lanser contends that the protagonist of the novel being unsexed and
                    ungendered produces two major outcomes. First, the reader cannot assign a gender
                    to the protagonist so that they are straight because the protagonist has
                    romantic experiences with both men and women, and thus the reader is always
                    confronted with queerness in the novel. Second, narrative tension from the
                    ambiguity of the protagonist’s sex and gender is created, and she uses as an
                    example of this a scene where the protagonist is in a fight with a male. While
                    an analysis of narrative tension would be interesting, in terms of examining the
                    exploration of sexual identities, understanding how the reader is confronted
                    with queerness is more helpful.
                Those who engage with ASM and Hustle Cat are confronted with queer identities from the beginning
                    of the character creation process to the end of the narrative. Whether readers
                    choose to create an identity that is queer or not does not matter, but the
                    design of the digital narrative and the resultant ability to play as queer
                    already situates the reader in an environment of fluid sexual identities. An
                    examination of the parallel/possible worlds and temporality of the digital
                    narrative can demonstrate this. Although to summarize her entire description of
                    these theories would take too long, Marie-Laure Ryan  notes there are two major types of possible worlds, actual or
                    non-actual. She says, In a story with
                        multiple branches, the world shown by the current branch is the
                        only actual one; the others are just nonactualized possibilities
                    (original italics). In other words, the world created by the reader’s active
                    involvement and shown to the reader is the actual world. She further argues that
                        the branches not chosen become
                        counterfactual and usually disappear from the readers’ minds until they
                        start all over again … and the branches passed over no longer
                    matter. It could be argued that in a hypertext novel, those as
                    complicated as Shelley Jackson’s Patchwork Girl, it
                    is extremely cognitively taxing for the reader to keep track of all the choices
                    they could have made, but the branches passed over do, in fact, matter and they
                    can have an effect on the reader’s mind.
                The queer effect of these parallel worlds or universes on a reader is created by
                    the experienced temporality in a digital narrative. Two notions of time in
                    digital narrative are used here. First, gameworld time, which is 
                        established by the set of events
                            taking place within the represented gameworld
                        
                    . Second, Mieke Bal’s  understanding of a
                    duration of time in a narrative as moments of crisis, moments when in a brief instant of time, the life of persons or an
                        entire nation takes a decisive turn. Though the outcomes of each
                    read-through may be different, each narrative is grounded in the same crisis —
                    winning your lover back in ASM and undoing the
                    curse from the cat café in Hustle Cat — and the
                    gameworld time becomes bound to the crisis in each read-through. If the lover in
                        ASM is getting married to the protagonist’s
                    rival in one read-through, and in another read-through the lover is leaving the
                    rival for the protagonist, because these events take place in the same gameworld
                    time and moment of crisis, the only logical explanation is that these two events
                    are occurring concurrently in two separate possible worlds. Each digital
                    narrative is then a sum of its parallel worlds, all of which conflict with each
                    other but are of equal validity. Thus, even if a player attempts to select or
                    create nonqueer avatars by selecting, for example, a male protagonist and
                    a female lover in ASM, these same avatars start off
                    queer. The design of the narrative necessitates that, at the same fictional time
                    of the narrative, the avatars are romantically engaged with avatars of different
                    sexes and genders in other universes. By default, each character must then
                    possess every quality within the limits of the digital narrative so that the
                    player can choose which one to experience in a particular read-through. The
                    player is confronted with the fact that, 
                        [i]n virtual reality, mind and
                            body, female and male, gay and straight don’t seem to be such natural
                            oppositions anymore, or even natural categories to assign to
                            people
                        
                    , and where multiple, fluid sexual identities are the norm becomes the
                    environment in which players explore.
                The conclusion that all of the possible actual or non-actual worlds in ASM and Hustle Cat do not
                    inhabit protagonists and love interests with heterosexual sexual identities
                    rests on two premises: first, that there is nothing in the narrative that can
                    confirm the heterosexuality of the protagonist; In ASM, the protagonist may be faced with homophobic or
                        stereotypical remarks by side characters if the protagonist is in a same-sex
                        relationship. However, the reader and protagonist can neither confirm nor
                        deny their sexual orientation. and second, that protagonists can be
                    attracted to either sex, and particularly in ASM, a
                    transgender character. Without the narrative marker of sexuality that Lanser
                         describes, the multiple sexualities possible in
                    a single character should only exhibit queerness. There is, however, a
                    possibility that the queerness is not fully experienced. If digital narratives
                    might make people imagine 
                        the concept of changing
                            bodies/identities/genders
                        
                    , the structured polysemy that Katherine Sender  describes, that the same message produces different meanings based on one’s
                    social background and beliefs, presents a possibility that straight people
                    imagine strictly straight worlds. To a part of the narrative audience who
                    refuses to accept that queer sexualities are in the narrative, the queer
                    characters in non-actualized worlds remain marginalized or do not exist because
                    the worlds in which queer characters play a role in the narrative are so
                    incongruous with the player’s norms. The power to explore gender and sexual
                    identities becomes hindered. Although this could be an issue in ASM, for Hustle Cat this
                    is not the case.
                The main objective in ASM is to survive and stop the
                    wedding ceremony to get back with the lover, but, as with any novel, digital or
                    otherwise, the goal of Hustle Cat is to master the
                    narrative, to finish reading and to understand the whole story. While in a
                    hypertext novel, as Robert Selig  notes with Stuart
                    Moulthrop’s Victory Garden, to go through every
                    combination of lexias is implausible, the mastery of the text is possible in the
                    more manageable narrative space of a visual novel. In Hustle Cat, there are six major routes the reader can go through,
                    and in each one the protagonist romances one bachelor/bachelorette. However, one
                    of these bachelors, Graves, is unlocked only after all the routes with other
                    characters have been completed. It is in this route that the backstory of the
                    curse is revealed. Thus, if readers are to fully understand the story and master
                    the text, they must go through every route and, in doing so, their protagonist
                    must experience romances with both males and females. Although the reader may
                    choose the sexes and genders that retain the illusion of heterosexuality, some
                    of the characters, such as Graves and Mason (a bachelorette), are revealed as
                    having queer relationships in the past and when readers must be romantically
                    involved with these two characters, they are reminded that no complete reading
                    of Hustle Cat can avoid interaction with queer
                    identities. Hustle Cat allows readers to explore
                    sexuality in a digital environment where queerness is the only constant, forcing
                    its readers to either adopt queer identities or actively engage with the lives
                    of its queer characters.
                The ability to explore one’s gender and sexuality in these two digital narratives
                    has been shown to be primarily based on the ability for its players and readers
                    to choose both the protagonist and a love interest’s sex and/or gender. This
                    freedom opens up permutations of sexes, genders and sexualities that are
                    unavoidable because in every play-through, regardless of whether a
                    heteronormative configuration of characters is chosen, the temporally parallel
                    structure of all the possible actual and non-actual worlds forces the player to
                    experience the narrative in a game system in which all the player-controlled
                    protagonists in the narrative are of all possible genders and sexual
                    orientations. Each player is thus confronted with the knowledge that the gender
                    and sexual identities of their on-screen presence can never be fully stable. The
                    inclusion of queer characters other than the player-controlled ones in the game
                    environment further force players to engage with non-heteronormative identities
                    in order to progress through the narrative. It is not only indie digital
                    narratives such as ASM and Hustle Cat that employ this queer worlds approach to
                    narrative construction and game design. In the following section, progressive
                    character creation designs in The Sims series, and
                    especially its latest sequel, The Sims 4, are
                    analyzed.
            

                The Sims, One through Four
                Every four to five years, beginning in 2000, Electronic Arts has released a new
                    sequel to its critically acclaimed and often-studied life-simulation series,
                        The Sims
                    . In 2014, the latest game in the series, The Sims 4
                    , was released and was named the most sold game in both
                    2014 and 2015 by the Entertainment Software Association 
                    . For many reasons, it has been and still is mentioned
                    in many video game studies. The first game, which became popular soon after its
                    release, drew attention to the simulation genre in video games. Mia Consalvo in
                    2003  called it perhaps the most progressive game yet released
                        concerning sexuality, making it a good candidate for study. Not many
                    substantial changes regarding sexuality were made to the series in the years
                    following the first game in the series, but with the newest update in the latest
                    addition, Electronic Arts may have reclaimed the title that Consalvo gave it
                    over a decade ago.
                In the first game of the series, Create-A-Sim (the name of the character creation
                    process in the game) is a simple matter of choosing between a few options. The
                    name, the age, the race, and the appearance of the Sim (the name of a character
                    or person in the game) can be decided by the player. The
                    Sim is either male or female. The player may allocate points to different
                    traits a Sim may have. A created Sim or group of Sims is always referred to as a
                    family; however, as Consalvo  notes, the player is
                    reminded in the game manual, by its illustrations of heterosexual couples and by
                    its statement that only heterosexual couples may have children, that there are
                    certain restrictions to homosexual romance. Marriage is only allowed for
                    heterosexual couples, while sex or playing in bed is
                    permitted to both homosexual and heterosexual couples. Sex, or
                            playing in bed, is not possible without the
                        installation of the expansion pack to the base game, The Sims: Livin’ Large. Heterosexual Sims do not have sex to
                        create a baby if the pack is not installed but do so through a dialogue
                        option. Any family of Sim adults can adopt a baby, and Sims may
                    receive a phone call when adoption is possible, though this happens randomly and
                    is out of the player’s control. From The Sims 2
                     onward, restrictions on homosexual Sims are lifted.
                    Marriage becomes an option for gay Sims, though it is called a joined
                        union until The Sims 3
                     where it is then referred to as marriage. Adopting a
                    child is possible from the second game in the series for Sims hetero-, homo- or
                    bisexual, and they can call adoption agencies directly to arrange this. In the
                    third installation, family is no longer used to describe a group of Sims
                    that live on the same lot but household is used. Character creation
                    mechanics remain largely unchanged except that each subsequent game allows for
                    more customization of, for example, hair styles, clothes and make up. The size
                    of a female Sim’s breasts is made modifiable in The Sims
                        3.
                When the latest game in the series, The Sims 4, was
                    first released, it had character creation options very similar to the previous
                    game. Electronic Arts in their marketing of the game emphasized that Sims now
                    had emotions, which are indicated to the player in terms
                    such as happy, flirty or depressed. On 2 June 2016, however, two years following
                    the initial release of the game, major changes to the customization of sex and
                    gender in the character creation system were introduced. Players now first
                    choose the Sim’s sex, which is either male or female. The following additional
                    four choices are given to the player when creating a Sim. 
                        Physical frame:
                                Masculine
                                Feminine
                            
                        Clothing preference:
                                Masculine
                                Feminine
                            
                        Pregnancy:
                                This Sim can become pregnant
                                This Sim can impregnate
                                Neither of the above
                            
                        Toilet options:
                                This Sim can use the toilet standing
                                This Sim can only use the toilet sitting down
                            
                     The physical frame of a Sim refers to aspects of their body, such as
                    their bone structure or muscle tone. Clothing preference is an option more for
                    convenience and decides what clothes are presented to players when selecting
                    their Sim’s attire, so that a Sim who prefers feminine
                    clothing will be shown those clothes and not masculine
                    clothing. Sims games previously only allowed
                        masculine clothes to be worn by male-sexed Sims and
                        feminine clothes for female-sexed Sims. Traditionally,
                    Sims of the female sex are the only ones who can be impregnated by having sex,
                    whereas those of the male sex, if they are abducted by aliens, can become
                    pregnant with alien offspring, which is not possible for female-sexed Sims.
                    Male-sexed Sims used to be the only ones who could impregnate. Pregnancy options
                    revamp this design and lift restrictions applied to the biological sexes. Toilet
                    options can be configured so that the animation of a Sim using the toilet
                    reflects the choice the player makes. After the initial Create-A-Sim sequence,
                    players may click on a wardrobe to change these aspects about their Sim again if
                    they wish to do so.
                While the masculine/feminine distinction used to describe the clothing in the
                    game can be seen as problematic, because it still presupposes an essentialist
                    configuration between clothing and sex, it could be argued that if no
                    distinction was made between masculine/feminine fashion, every time a
                    player clicks on clothing options, both types of clothes would appear, which
                    could lead to longer load times and confusion on the player’s part. Placing
                        stereotypically in front of terms could resolve this, but the new
                    options given to the player more than makes up for this little shortcoming.
                    Avoiding the oversimplistic conclusion that the game in offering the player such
                    freedoms is in some way liberatory, the character creation design can be first
                    approached from a feminist software design perspective. Feminist software
                    design, says Justine Cassell , adheres
                    to the following tenets: 
                        Transfer design authority to the user
                        Value subjective and experiental [sic] knowledge in the context of computer use
                        Allow use by many different kinds of users in different
                            contexts
                        Give the user a tool to express her voice and the truth of her
                            existence
                        Encourage collaboration among users
                     In the previous section on ASM and Hustle Cat, the emphasis was on how players’
                    subjective and experiential knowledge of themselves and the truth of their
                    existence are uncovered when design authority is transferred to the user by
                    creating a character. In the later installations of the Sims series, Electronic Arts created collaborative platforms on
                    which a community of Simmers can be formed. For The Sims 3, Electronic Arts 
                    created a site called The Exchange to encourage
                    players to share the Sims and buildings they had created in the game. The Sims 4 uses a Gallery
                    in-game where players can directly download others’ creations or upload their
                    own. In under a year of the game’s release, over 92 million Sims were created in
                        The Sims 4 
                    . The many discussion forum sites both created by
                    Electronic Arts and fans of the game encourage collaboration among and the
                    participation of players. The addition of the new gender customization options
                    allows players to share created Sims whose identities are explicitly queer so
                    that the feminist game design in the previous games is now also a queer game
                    design in that it promotes the explicit expression of the experiences and
                    subjectivities of players of varying gender and sexual identities.
                The queer worlds approach used in the previous section is applicable to The Sims 4 in that it could be conceived by the player
                    that a Sim is always inherently bisexual because Sims are able to romance a Sim
                    of any sex or gender. However, referring back to Sender’s  structured polysemy, players can imagine or perceive
                    a heteronormative gameworld very easily because the vast freedom given to
                    players in a Sims game makes the narrative produced
                    emergent. Tinsley Galyean  on emergent
                    narratives says, We all construct
                        narratives out of our daily activities to help us remember, understand,
                        categorize and share experiences. … If any narrative structure (or story)
                        emerges it is a product of our interactions and goals as we navigate the
                        experience. In a Sims game there are no
                    prewritten narratives like there are in ASM or
                        Hustle Cat. There is no identifiable moment of
                    crisis that can corner the player into recognizing each subsequent play-through
                    of the game as part of a universe of parallel worlds. In this case, it is the
                    sudden overhaul of the game’s character creation mechanics that queer the
                    game. It is the fact that the most popular computer game of 2014 and 2015 has
                    been updated to include transgenderism and a greater range of queer options that
                    demonstrates a recognition of queer gamers by the video gaming industry. The
                    trend in attitudes towards sex and gender in the Sims series that favors progressive and inclusive game designs
                    forces its players to come to terms with the fact that future games in the
                    series will continue developing to recognize queer identities.
                The exploratory element in The Sims 4 can be seen
                    from the play style that the design of the game encourages. Consalvo  argues that in The
                        Sims, the player does
                        not take on the identity of any one character in particular, but is
                        expected to create and manage multiple characters. … In The Sims, players can control any character they desire, by
                        quickly switching among them and by zooming into and out of different
                        houses. Although in the newer games, the player often controls a few
                    Sims in a household, and although alternating between a few households is still
                    an option, The Sims 4 encourages a play style in
                    which players attach themselves emotionally to the Sims they create. Major
                    gaming channels on YouTube such as Pewdiepie ,
                    Jacksepticeye , and DanAndPhilGAMES  have produced Let’s plays of The Sims 4 where the video makers have created
                    versions of themselves to play within the game, which demonstrates the more
                    personal approach taken to gameplay as opposed to the playing god mode that Consalvo describes. The
                    time and attention a player gives to tweaking their character, which the
                    detailed customization options makes possible, and the goals players hope their
                    Sims can achieve encourage an emotional investment in their characters. The game
                    marketed as that which allows players to play with life lets players explore the
                    world of the Sims through the eyes of the Sims. Richard Walsh  contends that the Sims
                    series as simulation and thus representation does not offer a reliable portrayal
                    of real human behavior, which seems to repeat Plato’s dictum in The Republic of art and representation as at a third
                    remove from reality, but this does not impede the player’s ability to
                    internalize on-screen experiences because of the verisimilitude of the systems
                    in the game. The resemblance of the relationships between Sims and gender and
                    sex systems in the gameworld to the experiential world assists players in taking
                    part as the narrative audience of the game — an audience that accepts a reality
                    where they are occupants of this digital world. The result is that players can
                    explore by experimenting with the combinations of sex and gender and sexual
                    identities of the characters they have created and are attached to. It is the
                    combined effects of the encouraged play style and the ease of choosing from a
                    multitude of queer identities that foreground the Sims
                        4 as a digital narrative that allows for the exploration of one’s
                    identity.
            

                Being Sexual Blind, Being Other
                        Bisexual and Concluding Remarks
                For Stephen Greer , in his examination of the
                        Fable and Dragon
                        Age video game series, the ability to play as different sexualities
                    without any consequences presumes an
                        even playfield and reveals a sexuality blind approach that might
                        free creators from the burden of
                        attempting to create an extended range of avatars, characters and narrative
                        variations covering multiple configurations. Greer quotes T. L.
                    Taylor , who says the result is that issues pertaining to gender
                        and race get taken off the table as areas to be articulated, debated, and
                        confronted. It is possible that the treatment of different
                    sexualities as equal can cause the important issues on this subject to be
                    disregarded, and in a message board on Steam, some players commented on the lack
                    of homophobia in ASM as unrealistic ; and on a popular site that specializes in
                    articles on Sims games, SimsVIP  comments on the ability for two biologically male
                    Sims to impregnate each other sparked criticism for being anatomically
                    inaccurate. It could even be said that changing a Sim’s sex, gender, or ability
                    to be pregnant mid-game with a click on the wardrobe is unrealistic and does not
                    adequately reflect the psychological and physical challenges a person faces when
                    undergoing operations to change their sex. However, it must be acknowledged that
                    issues relating to sex, gender identity and sexuality, particularly
                    transgenderism, are only beginning to be incorporated into games by major video
                    game companies.
                Further, in response to allegations that some inclusive video game designs,
                    because of the conflation of varying sexualities, foster an environment in which
                    important issues regarding sexual identities are ignored, it should first be
                    noted that even the inclusion of queer options in video games was met with
                    uproar, as Megan Condis  notes, from the straight male gamer
                    demographic, thus placing issues of gender and sexuality under the spotlight.
                    The academic reportage of forum threads started by conservative personalities
                    such as Bastal and Duncaaaaaan has revealed the on-going debate on these issues
                    that have taken place simply because game designers have so much as accommodated
                    people outside the privileged heteronormative demographic. In place of the
                    sexuality/gender/transgender-blind approach by some scholars toward the design
                    of video games that encourages an equal treatment of individuals, the emergent
                    transgressive poststructuralist ethos, the idea of other bisexuality, should be considered as
                    well. As described in her seminal essay, The Laugh of the
                        Medusa, Helénè Cixous’s  other
                    bisexuality is: each one’s location
                        in self (répérage en soi) of the presence —
                        variously manifest and insistent according to each person, male or female —
                        of both sexes, non-exclusion either of the difference of one sex, and, from
                        this self-permission, multiplication of the effects of the
                        inscription of desire, over all parts of my body and the other body.
                    Cixous’s The Laugh of the Medusa argued against
                    Sigmund Freud’s Medusa’s Head, published in 1922.
                    Whereas Freud saw bisexuality as a merge of masculinity and femininity, Cixous’s
                        other bisexuality
                    resists these binaries. She imagines a sexuality that destabilizes traditional
                    dichotomies of male and female, masculinity and femininity — phallogocentric
                    dichotomies where femininity is formed based on what masculinity is not. What
                    results from other bisexuality is 
                        a future when males and females
                            explore the infinite possibilities of their bisexuality, in this world
                            of elsewhere, woman will no longer hold us captive, and the
                            either/or of essentialism will be worn out
                        
                    . Other bisexuality describes desire as flowing infinitely and
                    everywhere, from anyone and to anyone, with no restrictions whatsoever.
                Cixous’s essay was also famous for its coinage of écriture
                        féminine, or feminine writing, which according to her is
                    where other bisexuality can be experienced. However, the spirit of other
                    bisexuality appears in the discussed digital narratives as well. While it is
                    implicit that characters in ASM or Hustle Cat are sexed as male or female, and it is
                    explicit in the Sims series, these digital
                    narratives design characters as bodies of infinitely variable desires not
                    directed exclusively at any gender or sex, where essentialist configurations of
                    gender and sexual identities collapse. Especially in the queer parallel worlds
                    analysis, where a digital narrative is the culmination of playthroughs or
                    readthroughs with protagonists of all possible sexualities, the limitlessness of
                    experimentation with desire encapsulates the transgression of other bisexuality.
                    In such digital narratives, the progressive poststructuralist understanding
                    trumps the heteronormative categories of genders and sexualities and a
                    destabilized essentialism and unstable identities become the only stable
                    understanding of gender and sexuality. Considering the freedom to choose one’s
                    on-screen identity without consequence as embodying the spirit of other
                    bisexuality rather than being sexuality blind appreciates the transgressive
                    potential and power of the digital narrative. It also recognizes progression of
                    the designs of digital narratives in a direction that promotes the inclusion of
                    a previously marginalized gaming demographic. This is not to say that the
                    shortcomings that a sexuality blind approach uncovers should be ignored, but the
                    digital narrative as a platform where unrestrained, multidirectional libidinal
                    economies can be realized and can be experimented with should be considered as
                    well.
                As Jerry Kang  notes, passing in real life is
                    significantly more difficult than doing so in a digital space — to pass racially
                    in real life, he says, for example, one might need to undergo expensive and
                    dangerous surgery. Digital environments allow for the separation between the
                    experienced self and the expressed self at the click of a button. Sherry Turkle
                         contends that when you choose to swap
                    genders virtually, you may discover
                        things about yourself that you never knew before … [and] explore conflicts
                        raised by one’s biological gender. The ability to play as different
                    sexes and have romantic attachments with either sex appeared as early as at the
                    beginning of the Sims series in 2000. However, only
                    recently have digital narrative designs considered that the sex to which one is
                    assigned may differ from the gender identity that one experiences. Even though
                    hypersexualized sex icons continue to appear to cater to the straight male
                    community, as major digital entertainment companies become more aware of the
                    previously marginalized consumers of video games, characters with non-binary
                    gender identities, such as Krem in the widely popular video game, Dragon Age: Inquisition
                    , are slowly being introduced.
                The study of the exploration of gender and sexual identities has previously
                    focused on interaction in online MUDs, a digital space that requires its users
                    to have some coding knowledge or the willingness to learn coding, but digital
                    narratives accessible by a greater community, such as Sims games, ASM, and Hustle Cat, are beginning to realize the same
                    exploratory function as well, in particular by situating readers in an
                    environment where gender and sexuality are never fixed, where boundaries of a
                    structuralist ideology of gender and sexuality are continuously challenged. The
                    movement toward narratives where sexual difference and rigid configurations of
                    sexuality are rigorously being undermined might suggest that Cixous’s visions
                    are not that far behind.
            
