Title: N/A
Volume:  017
Issue:  1
Date:  26 May 2023
Abstract:  

				
				In recent decades, university research has become bound up in the expectation of innovation, often at the expense of sustainability. As a guiding principle, innovation has shaped the goals of universities and funders; the recent turn to sustainability, signaled by the rise of data management plans and data deposit requirements, may indicate a welcome discursive shift. This article explores the interplay of knowledge creation and mentorship in the development of digital humanities research projects, with the aim of articulating how to resolve the artificial tension between innovation and sustainability. While often framed in opposition to each other, or used in a neoliberal framework to force researchers to do more with fewer resources, innovation and sustainability can, this article argues, be dual goals in the development of lasting digital humanities scholarship, with a focus on XML serializations’ role in this scholarly ecosystem.
			
Full Body Text: 

					
					In recent decades, university research has been bound up in the
						expectation of innovation without the material support for
						sustainability. As a guiding principle, innovation has shaped the
						goals of universities and funders; the recent turn to sustainability,
						signaled by the rise of data management plans and data deposit
						requirements, may indicate a welcome discursive shift. This article
						explores the interplay of knowledge creation and mentorship in the
						development of digital humanities research projects, with the aim of
						addressing the artificial tension between innovation and
						sustainability. While often framed in opposition to each other, or
						used in a neoliberal framework to force researchers to do more with
						fewer resources, innovation and sustainability can, this article argues, be
						dual goals in the development of lasting digital humanities
						scholarship. The Endings Project principles and framework, as outlined
						in the introduction to this issue, represent a methodological
						innovation that provides a solution to the challenge of
						sustainability. Drawing on the Lesbian and Gay Liberation in Canada
						project as a case study, this article considers the tensions between
						sustainability and innovation in the ongoing life of digital
						humanities projects, and role of the TEI mark-up language and Endings
						Project principles for the future creation and preservation of
						humanities scholarship online.

						Scope, Scale, and Sustainability at the turn of the Twenty-First
							Century
						Throughout the 1990s, most North American digital humanities work fell
							into one of two camps: edition and online resource creation or
							software development. Many of us started as junior faculty or
							graduate students in the former camp even if we now work in the
							latter. There were few graduate or undergraduate courses in the
							digital humanities in Canada at the time. Most of the graduate
							training that shaped the scholarship in which we now engage was
							offered through workshops or research assistantships. In addition
							to the challenge of accessing training, the generation of
							graduate students from the first decade of the 2000s in Canada
							were working when digital humanities methods were occasionally
							hampered by disciplinary mistrust. In North America, the digital
							humanities, when they garnered attention, were dogged by concerns
							that they did not constitute real humanities scholarship
							. This dismissal of the non-traditional
								scholarly output of digital humanities projects is distinct
								from the later dismissal of digital humanities scholars as
								cool kids who have undue access to funds. For more on these
								debates see Matthew Kirschenbaum’s What Is 'Digital
								Humanities,' and Why Are They Saying Such Terrible Things
								about It? and Am I a Digital Humanist? Confessions of a
									Neoliberal Tool  . 
						
						The digital humanities’ outsider status notwithstanding, in the
							period from the mid 1990s to 2010, large-scale digital humanities
							publishing projects flourished online. Digital humanities
							scholars reveled in the affordances and pleasures of online
							publishing. Hypertext's ability to let readers move through texts
							in non-linear ways attracted a good deal of scholarly attention
							 . More important, perhaps, for
							questions of sustainability and innovation, was the sheer scope
							of the projects that scholars undertook to recuperate and share
							material that traditional publishers could not provide in print.
							Many flagship projects from this era had a huge remit. For
							example, Orlando, started in 1995, provides
							interpretive and biographical information about women’s writing
							in the British Isles from the beginnings to the present; the Women Writers’ Project (WWP), started in
							1988, is dedicated to early women’s writing in English; and Voices from the Gaps, started in 1996,
							aims to share the works of marginalized artists, predominantly
							women writers of color living and working in North America
							(see , , 
							, , 
							and ). These projects are
							distinct from those with the more narrow scope that characterize
							current digital humanities projects. The directors of smaller
							projects with short development cycles can more easily frame a
							project as novel or innovative. Larger, longer-running projects,
							which are in greater need of sustaining maintenance, must develop
							new micro-projects to frame their work as innovative. These
							 projects are often central to humanities
							research and teaching, and their long-term stability is key to
							maintaining access to the cultural record (for example, the
							disappearance of information about the cultural conditions of
							generations of women’s writing in the British Isles would be a
							significant loss, and yet there are few funding mechanisms to
							support the maintenance of such a corpus). As Jessica Otis has
							pointed out in her discussion of how the Roy Rosenzweig Center
							for History and New Media decides which projects to continue to
							support, principal investigators from the turn of the century
							often promised funders not only a broad project scope, but also
							that digitized material would stay up online indefinitely. The
							move from early hypertext-only sites to database-backed sites and
							content management systems that now need to be migrated forward
							or need virtual environments to run has made keeping the sites
							functional sometimes difficult and often impossible (see Holmes
							& Takeda and Otis in this issue).
						In the age of large-scale online publishing projects at the turn of
							the twenty-first century, scholars took the mechanisms of
							publishing into their own hands. Many scholars invested in
							early work on race [and class and gender] in digital humanities
							insisted on building editions and digital texts as an activist
							intervention in the closed canon . This
							move was not always an indictment of traditional publishers: many
							scholars recognized that, for example, publishing 400 texts
							written by women between 1526 and 1850, as the WWP has,
							represented a greater financial burden than most print-based
							publishers could undertake or hope to recover through sales.
							Furthermore, the affordances of hypertext and of databases to
							reorganize and connect texts nearly endlessly offered advantages
							that printed texts could not supply. The development of easily
							archivable mark-up languages, such as TEI, has been key to the
							development of corpora that are easy to sustain.
						TEI, the XML-based language of the Text Encoding Initiative
							Consortium for modeling documents and formalizing text in a
							computationally tractable way, has been a major part of the
							digital humanities’ efforts to engage in sustainable long-running
							publication and textual analysis. The TEI was conceived by a
							multidisciplinary group of scholars and students at a
							Vassar-hosted meeting in 1987; over 50 scholars worked on its
							initial release in 1990 . The development of TEI-SGML
							(now TEI-XML) for representing textual material was an area of
							major intellectual effort and innovation that provided a useful
							tool for online edition production, and responded directly to the
							needs of editors and readers in a way that print publication
							could not. The proliferation of TEI impacted the growth of the
							digital humanities at the turn of the twenty-first century: many
							junior scholars were introduced to TEI through workshops and
							research assistantships. Not only is the TEI designed to meet
							the needs of textual editors, it also offers a number of
							advantages to users who have no prior technical background. TEI
							is human-readable in a way that other formats, for example JSON
							or Turtle, are not. TEI is platform-agnostic, which means that
							anyone can start writing valid TEI without the expensive overhead
							and resource-intensive setup of other tools, such as databases,
							Hadoop clusters, Adobe Creative Suite software, or 3D printers.
							Finally, TEI is not a language or tool borrowed from another
							discipline to be put to a humanities' purpose. Instead, it is a
							community-led humanities-specific language. The language
							continues to grow in response to TEI-sponsored Special Interest
							Groups and in response to requests from regular users who want
							the language to expand to include new use cases. Volunteers
							govern the TEI Consortium through a Board of Directors and a
							Technical Council who undertake the demanding governance and
							stewardship of the TEI Guidelines, services, and documentation.
							The TEI Consortium provides tools to analyze and customize TEI
							such as the eXtensible Stylesheet Transformation Language (XSLT)
							scripts, the XML-ODD format for TEI customization, and tools for
							users to display TEI–including the TEI Archiving, Publishing,
							and Access Service (TAPAS) and CETEIcean. For many humanities
							scholars, TEI has been the introduction to
							digital humanities scholarship and learning to use these scripts
							and tools has been key to analysis and online publication.
						While there have been advances in artificial intelligence and
							application design that support some branches of digital
							humanities scholarship, the TEI continues to be the gold standard
							for edition encoding. Confronted with a plain text transcription
							of a primary source, a computer will know nothing about either
							text structure (for example, where pages start and end, or where
							the boundaries of paragraphs are) or about more nuanced content
							(for example, who added the interlinear glosses to a manuscript,
							how many years separate the original scribe and the glossator,
							how abbreviations ought to be expanded, or which calendar system
							is used in the text). Broadly, encoders use TEI to add what they
							know or wish to argue about a transcribed text in a
							computationally parsable form. The TEI was originally designed to
							help scholars describe what they know about a source text; the
							language has since expanded to let scholars describe images and
							any number of other cultural artifacts and ancillary information
							in a robust and systematic way. Best of all, TEI creation does
							not rely on databases, content management systems, or any other
							technology that requires perennial migration.
					

						A Personal Account of Mentorship and Project Development in the
							Canadian Context
						A part of the TEI-user community consists of scholars who are
							engaged in largely DIY encoding and publishing practices. In the
							Victorian Studies community in which I trained, this ethos grew
							out of the inaugural Networked Infrastructure for
							Nineteenth-Century Electronic Scholarship (NINES) workshop in
							July 2005, which catalyzed the use of TEI to facilitate the
							aggregated search of a number of now-iconic digital humanities
							projects, including the Nineteenth-Century Serials Edition
								Since I trained on the Yellow
									Nineties, which initially had two principal
								investigators, I cannot be surprised, on reflection, that
								the Lesbian and Gay Liberation in
									Canada project, which I co-direct with my research
								partner, Michelle Schwartz, also has two principal
								investigators, owes much of its structures and ways of
								working to the Yellow Nineties
								Online. I will refer to sole principal investigatorship
								below even though joint investigatorship is relatively
								common in Canadian digital humanities (see, for example, the
								investigatorship of Patricia Clements and Isobel Grundy on
									Orlando, Geoffrey Rockwell and
								Stéfan Sinclair on Voyant, and Ian
								Milligan, Nick Ruest, Jeremy Lin, and Jefferson Bailey on
									Archives Unleashed). 
							, The Poetess
								Archive , and 
							The Vault at Pfaff's . 
							The initial NINES projects each ran on its own
							project-specific stack: at the time there were no content
							management systems or prefabricated hosting services for TEI.
							That said, NINES was a community-led standards success: projects
							federated within NINES used TEI as a common encoding format,
							shared NINES keywords, and featured stable project URIs. These
							shared standards allowed for listing and linking within NINES,
							leaving the question of interface and backend development to
							individual projects. My formative training was on one of the
							projects initiated at the inaugural NINES summer workshop, the
							Yellow Nineties Online (1890s.ca). 
							Relaunched as Yellow Nineties
							2.0 in 2015, the Yellow Nineties and its federated sister
							projects feature eight fin-de-siècle little magazines, with
							supporting biographies and essays that focus on the context
							and networks of the little magazines’ production and reception;
							teaching resources and student scholarship; and tools for visual
							culture analysis . 
						Smaller digital humanities teams rely on project members’
							understandings of their shared project as a whole. This holistic
							knowledge is a boon for sustainability. As Frank Tough has
							argued, humanities research is a craft, and, at the graduate
							level is often taught through intensive, one-on-one research
							assistantships . In Canada in the 2000s, this model
							continued in the digital humanities, with many graduate students
							learning from principal investigators on small teams. The
							Canadian funding system, particularly the support provided by the
							mid-sized SSHRC Standard Research Grant (1998-2011,
							$21,000-$250,000 over three years), and the uptake of digital
							humanities predominantly at smaller universities, added
							structural elements that encouraged the creation of small teams,
							as opposed, for example, to the broader, multidisciplinary,
							multi-university projects with dedicated staff of more recent
							years. Research assistants on these small projects got to learn
							how projects were built, to understand what each member of a
							small and intimate team was doing, to contribute to the
							infrastructural and content development of each project, and to
							see how the technical infrastructure and subject matter of each
							project were knit together in the intellectual labor of each
							project  . Both
							Matthew Kirschenbaum and Julia Flanders suggest that this refusal
							to separate out infrastructure and content development from the
							intellectual effort was a distinctive feature of digital
							humanities in the United States at the time (this approach is
							certainly central to the development of TEI as a language), as
							indeed it was in Canada. While the parallel development of
							infrastructure and content may be framed as the result of
							happenstance, this feature is consonant with humanities
							approaches to research as well as to the craft-aligned mentorship
							of the next generation of scholars. As Lorraine Janzen
							Kooistra–one of the two original principal investigators of the
								Yellow Nineties–has pointed out when
							comparing the project to more recent digital humanities projects:
							we did not know that we were supposed to
							have a technical manager or even collaborators with a background
							in computer science . The project was
							instead developed by the principal investigators and students
							with extensive consultation with librarians and with hosting
							support (initially on a desktop computer running as a server)
							from a single Faculty of Arts systems administrator.
								European digital humanities scholars and others have made
								great strides in the creation of linked data that focuses on
								cultural material central to the humanities. Some notable
								projects, such as Social Networks and Archival Context Project (SNAC), originate in the United States. In
								Canada, where there is real new growth in cultural linked
								data creation in the digital humanities, libraries, and
								government. For more information see work by the Canadian
								Heritage Information Network, Linked Infrastructure for
								Networked Cultural Scholarship, and the Single Interface for
								Music Score Searching and Analysis.
						
						In this craft system of humanities research training, graduate
							students tend to go on to reproduce the methods of their
							supervisors and to work in ways that build on the conditions of
							their training. This has certainly been the case in my career:
							having learned the technical aspects of digital humanities work
							from humanities scholars, often on small teams, I came away with
							the sense that each project should not have any elements that the
							principal investigator did not understand herself, and whose
							creation or deployment she could not undertake at a high level.
							In short, no one working on the project would do anything the
							principal investigator could not have done herself, given
							sufficient time. This approach is a useful safeguard against any
							changes in university affiliation or changes in local IT policy
							that might require moving a project, although it is not
							necessarily a safeguard against the demands of upgrades. The
							approach also makes it easier to communicate with funders, since
							the principal investigator is conversant with all parts of the
							project. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, it is enormously
							intellectually fulfilling . Mentorship on digital
							projects that fit this model is indeed like traditional
							humanities mentorship, in which research assistants join
							principal investigators in the archives, on field research trips,
							in literature review preparation, in discussion of argumentation,
							and in manuscript revision. If the assistantship lasts long
							enough, assistants can get to know every part of the project, and
							can graduate with the knowledge they need to develop their own
							projects.
					

						Balancing Sustainability and Innovation in Digital Humanities
							Projects
						A single principal investigator who understands all parts of a
							project reduces project dependencies and so can safeguard a
							project. However, this is not the only, or even necessarily best,
							model for digital humanities project development. The model has
							two central drawbacks that may work against sustainability:
							fragility and non-scalability. If the documentation is poor and
							there is little buy-in from others, it is hard to maintain the
							project if the principal investigator has to leave the team for
							any reason. The project will also be fragile if the principal
							investigator does not update the project’s technology stack,
							especially once the technology reaches an end-of-life stage and
							options to ensure backwards compatibility become cumbersome (for
							more on this topic see Jessica Otis’ article in this issue of DHQ; for a more general discussion see
							).
						The second challenge of the model of a sole principal investigator
							who could perform every project task is that of scalability. I do
							not mean to use the term scalable as a
							neoliberal dog whistle meaning to do more with
								less, or meaning to get students to pay for what were
							once government- or endowment-supported low student-to-researcher
							ratios enjoyed by previous generations. Instead, I would like to
							point to the benefits of larger, more collaborative research
							projects. They are often less fragile, with more opportunities
							for leadership and therefore more people who could steward the
							project if the principal investigator has to step back. They are
							also more scalable in terms of knowledge creation, in that they
							will have multiple research questions, spanning several domains,
							with distinct areas of investigation of interest to, for example,
							collaborators in computer science, information science, the social
							sciences, and the humanities.
						No matter what the leadership or collaboration structure of a
							research project may be, the central goal of primary research is
							the creation of new knowledge. This goal is the hallmark of
							university-led research, and yet it may be at odds with the
							discourses of innovation and sustainability in the contemporary
							research funding landscape. In exploring these tensions in
							project development, I will use the Lesbian and
								Gay Liberation in Canada (LGLC)
							project, which I co-direct with Michelle Schwartz (Toronto
							Metropolitian University), as my case study. LGLC has
								been supported by two Social Science and Humanities Research
								Council of Canada Insight Grants (2014–20, 2021-25) and by
								the Ministry of Canadian Heritage’s Canada History Fund
								(2021-2023). Grant partners include Susan Brown director of
								the Canadian Writing Research
									Collaboratory (CWRC,
								University of Guelph), Don McLeod (University of Toronto
								Libraries), El Chenier director of the Archives of Lesbian Oral Testimony (ALOT, Simon Fraser University),
								Fabien Galipeau (Archives gaies du Québec), and Fangmin Wang and
								M.J. Suhonos (Toronto Metropolitan University Library &
								Archives). The project has been built with the support of 16
								paid research assistants since 2014. Their scholarship has
								included archival research, encoding, UX, data conversion,
								frontend design, and implementation. We are also grateful for
								the support of Toronto Metropolitan’s Centre for Digital
								Humanities, the Toronto Metropolitan Library Collaboratory,
								the University of Ottawa’s Labo de données en sciences
								humaines/Humanities Data Lab, the Canadian Foundation for
								Innovation, and Compute Canada (for more please see
								https://lglc.ca/about). 
						
						The goal of the LGLC project is to analyze
							the emergence and expansion of gay liberation as an intellectual
							movement backed by informal and formal political action, in order
							to better understand the conditions that foster political change
							and to recover gay liberation history for a popular audience. The
							project has been built around two books by our collaborator
							Donald McLeod, Lesbian and Gay Liberation in
								Canada volumes 1 and 2  . McLeod’s
							chronologies consist of 3,100 chronological events spanning 1964
							to 1981. Using TEI, the LGLC team has
							encoded each event, marking up names, places, dates,
							organizations, and periodicals. The core events are
							contextualized by, to date, a further 32,000 entity records about
							people, location, publications, and organizations. The team is
							now involved in further archival research to uncover more events
							spanning 1960 to 1985. The TEI serves as a discovery mechanism
							for our analysis, letting us explore the relationships between
							the entities, and as the basis for our public-facing web app at
							lglc.ca. The lglc.ca web app consists of the standard set of
							tools, or stack, for web publication: a
							server, a database, a programming language to retrieve material
							from the database, and front-end scripts to create HTML for
							display in a browser. lglc.ca is hosted and supported by Toronto
							Metropolitan University Library's Collaboratory. It consists of a
							neo4j database, a node.js app for retrieval, and
							jade.js/pug.js-templates to create the HTML front end. It offers
							visitors to the site a graphic user interface that enables many
							of the exploratory and analytical features that otherwise would
							be available only to users with the skills to process the TEI
							that feeds the neo4j database.
						I must say that, to this day, working with TEI and its user
							community is one of my greatest professional pleasures.
								Like many digital humanities scholars of my generation, I
								learned to write and process TEI in graduate school, but was
								enrolled in my PhD before most Canadian universities had a
								digital humanities course curriculum. My formal education in
								TEI creation and project development came from workshops
								offered through the Women Writers
									Project (now at Northeastern University), the
								Digital Humanities Summer Institute (DHSI, University of
								Victoria), and the Initiative for Digital Humanities, Media,
								and Culture (Texas A&M). The Yellow
									Nineties Online and the Toronto Metropolitan
								University Centre for Digital Humanities funded my travel
								and registration fees for many of these workshops. I now
								teach TEI at the DHSI and in undergraduate classes. Not
								only is it a useful language for representing textual and
								visual sources, it helps me teach undergraduates how to
								think like editors and how to knit together primary and
								secondary sources in their analysis of text. While teaching
								others how to create and process XML in various formats 
								likely appeals to the misguided neoliberal hard skills
								approach to higher education, it is in practice a key tool
								to empower students how to think about editing, research,
								analysis, and about how they can literally shape the systems
								that underpin our experience of technology. Moreover,
							for the purposes of this special issue, I must stress the safety
							and archivability the TEI lends to my projects, including the LGLC. From the first, TEI has been
							central to the LGLC preservation strategy.
							Unlike our database, TEI is human readable without specialized
							software or an integrated development environment (IDE). We are
							certain that our validated data can be preserved as a series of
							flat files, microfiche, or even as a printout that will be
							legible to future generations . The code
							itself does not need more than text editor software to view, and
							the ubiquity of XML leaves us assured that if our TEI is not
							decipherable in the future it will be because of a more
							significant failure of digital systems well beyond the scope and
							control of academia, commercial companies, or even
							governments.
						But what of our web app? Databases and their interfaces are, as
							this special issue underscores, notoriously difficult to maintain
							after the end of a project's active development. We have,
							therefore, never expected that the lglc.ca web application would
							exist forever. However, having been trained on the Yellow Nineties, which is part of the
							generation of digital humanities projects that are the enduring
							focus of a principal investigator or a pair of investigators for
							decades, we too expect to work on the LGLC
							project for many years to come. Unlike many more recent digital
							humanities projects, like the original collaborative Torn Apart map project, the
							Serendip-o-matic web app, or other shorter-term projects, our
							plans for decades of active development may, on the one hand, be
							attractive to funders, but on the other hand, have kept us from
							devoting resources to infrastructural changes that we would need
							for the graceful end to the project beyond periodic or final
							deposits of our TEI in national and institutional
							repositories.
						Our attention to innovation in the development of lglc.ca at the
							expense of sustainability has been shaped by one of the best
							parts of the university research culture: the commitment to
							creating new knowledge. We are not alone in this approach. While
							replication and verification are central parts of the research
							ecosystem, most research is meant to break new ground and benefit
							the public through sharing the knowledge they supported us in
							creating. That said, in the last twenty years in the Canadian
							funding context, that drive to create new knowledge was coupled
							with a focus on innovation. Cultural and governmental privileging
							of innovation is, for example, hardwired into the main source of
							institutional research infrastructure funding in Canada, the
							Canadian Foundation for Innovation (CFI). And, in as much as it
							dovetails with the pleasure of new knowledge creation, innovation
							is no bad thing. A key drawback, however, to the assumption that
							innovation constitutes a good end in itself, perhaps at the
							expense of sustainability, is that innovation
							and sustainability have been discursively
							opposed to one another  . Principal investigators' perceptions that they may 
							be turned down for research funding if they focus on using tried
							and true methods or on maintaining projects, rather than
							innovating, materially entrenches this discursive opposition.
						There is, however, a sea change under way. In Canada, our public
							funders are increasingly requiring the open-access publication of
							results, the deposit of data where appropriate, and the creation
							of sustainability plans. Happily, on the LGLC project, some of our innovations have led us back
							to sustainable research development plans: one of our initial
							innovations in 2013 was to use a then-new graph database, neo4j,
							as the backend for our public web app. This choice involved thinking
							through how best to convert our TEI, which relies on a
							hierarchical tree structure, for representation in neo4j's
							non-hierarchical node-and-edge-filled graph structure. The
							exercise of thinking through how to model our data as both a tree
							and a graph led my research lab into work on how to represent TEI
							as linked data, another format that relies on graph structures.
							Linked data has, unlike a neo4j instantiation of the data, the
							option of remaining in flat files for knowledge creation and
							long-term preservation.
								https://ncse.ac.uk/index.html. 
						
						Sustainability and innovation: it may be possible to have it both
							ways. Indeed, Project Endings methods represent a marriage of
							sustainability and innovation. One of the project's principles 
							brings together these two concepts:
							no boutique or fashionable technologies: use 
								only standards with
							support across all platforms, whose long-term viability is assured, 
							 . The
							recommendation resolves the tension between sustainability and
							innovation: as languages, HTML, CSS, and JavaScript are
							sustainable and secure, but the Project Endings recommendation
							that researchers use them from the first, rather than producing
							database-based backed sites that are not sustainable in the long
							term, is a methodological innovation. While flat files that
							researchers deposit in repositories will be preserved, and in the
							case of TEI will remain human readable, these deposited files are
							less readily accessible to the members of the public who fund our
							research than a searchable web-version of the same material. The
							creation of project sites that are accessible (by virtue of being
							on the web) and that will remain accessible (by virtue of being
							lightweight, secure, and easy to host) is truly innovative. As
							someone who trained in the creation of digital humanities
							projects that are intended to run for decades under a model of
							development using tools that any principal investigator could
							understand, I welcome the Project Endings’ recommendation. As
							someone who is keen to see digital humanities projects of any
							duration persist in a format that is of maximum utility to the
							public, I am doubly pleased. The challenge will be to continue to
							use Project Endings principles to keep digital scholarship
							accessible, even after the Project Endings recommendations move
							from being innovative to being the gold standard.
					
