Title:  Tracing 
Volume:  017
Issue:  2
Date:  20 July 2023
Abstract:  
            
            The ubiquity of digital technologies in citizen’s lives marks a major qualitative
               shift where automated decisions taken by algorithms deeply affect the lived
               experience of ordinary people. But this is not just an action-oriented change as
               computational systems can also introduce epistemological transformations in the
               constitution of concepts and ideas. However, a lack of public understanding of how
               algorithms work also makes them a source of distrust, especially concerning the way
               in which they can be used to create frames or channels for social and individual
               behaviour. This public concern has been magnified by election hacking, social media
               disinformation, data extractivism, and a sense that Silicon Valley companies are out
               of control. The wide adoption of algorithms into so many aspects of peoples’ lives,
               often without public debate, has meant that increasingly algorithms are seen as
               mysterious and opaque, when they are not seen as inequitable or biased. Up until
               recently it has been difficult to challenge algorithms or to question their
               functioning, especially with wide acceptance that software’s inner workings were
               incomprehensible, proprietary or secret (cf. open source). Asking why an algorithm
               did what it did often was not thought particularly interesting outside of a strictly
               programming context. This meant that there has been a widening explanatory gap in
               relation to understanding algorithms and their effect on peoples’ lived experiences.
               This paper argues that Critical Code Studies offers a novel field for developing
               theoretical and code-epistemological practices to reflect on the explanatory deficit
               in modern societies from a reliance on information technologies. The challenge of new
               forms of social obscurity from the implementation of technical systems is heightened
               by the example of machine learning systems that have emerged in the past decade. A
               key methodological contribution of this paper is to show how concept formation, in
               this case of the notion of toxicity, can be traced through key categories and
               classifications deployed in code structures (e.g. modularity and layering software)
               but also how these classifications can appear more stable than they actually are by
               the tendency of software layers to obscure even as they reveal. How a concept such as
                  toxicity can be constituted through code and discourse and then used
               unproblematically is revealing in relation to both its technical deployment but also
               for a possible computational sociology of knowledge. By developing a broadened notion
               of explainability, this paper argues that critical code studies can make important
               theoretical, code-epistemological and methodological contributions to digital
               humanities, computer science and related disciplines.
         
Full Body Text: 

            Introduction
            In the past decade, due to the perceived lack of accountability of algorithmic
               systems, particularly automated decision systems, a new explanatory demand has
               crystallized in an important critique of computational opaqueness and new forms of
               technical transparency called explainability. We see this, for example, in
               challenges to facial recognition technologies, public unease with algorithmic
               judicial systems and other automated decision systems. There have been new regulatory
               attempts to capture some of the ideas that stem from explainability such as the
                  Algorithmic Accountability Act 2022 in the US, and
               the General Data Protection Regulation 2016/679 (GDPR)
               in the European Union. These forms of regulation mandate a requirement for a user of
               algorithms to be able to seek a representation (or explanation) of an
               algorithm used in an automated decision by a computer system and that the developers
               should provide one (see , , , cf ). These are important
               issues and are changing the way in which algorithms are designed and
                  implemented. In relation to these requirements, it is interesting to
                  contrast the notion of explainability, which is intended to create
                  explanations, with the notion of observability
                  developed by . They argue that observability emphasises the conditions for the practice of observing in a
                     given domain…. We therefore position observability as an explicit means of, not
                     an alternative to regulation
                  . In this paper, I seek to explicitly link
                  explainability to critique, so whereas observability is offered as an
                  administrative concept, I aim to use explainability as a critical concept (see
                  also footnote 4). 
            
            This public concern has been magnified by election hacking, social media
               disinformation, data extractivism, and a sense that Silicon Valley companies are out
               of control. The wide adoption of algorithms into so many aspects of peoples’ lives,
               often without public debate, has meant that increasingly algorithms are seen as
               mysterious and opaque, when they are not seen as inequitable or biased. Up until
               recently it has been difficult to challenge algorithms or to question their
               functioning, especially with wide acceptance that software’s inner workings were
               incomprehensible, proprietary or secret (cf. 
               regarding open source). Asking why an algorithm did what it did was often not thought
               to be particularly interesting outside of a strictly programming context. This meant
               that there has been a widening explanatory gap in relation to
               understanding algorithms and their effect on peoples’ lived experiences.The
                  example of this is the mutant algorithm described by Boris Johnson in the
                  case of UK students’ exam results showing the gap between expectation and output
                  from algorithms (see ).
            
            However, in this paper rather than focus on the regulative aspect, I want to use the
               insights of critical code studies to explore how the code itself might usefully be
               analysed in situ, rather than through a secondary representation created by an
                  explainable black-box. Many of the explainability systems currently
                  under development are actually interpretative automated systems, often using
                  machine-learning themselves, to create explainable products that can be presented
                  to a user. This raises the interesting question of a double hermeneutic when
                  understanding as not one but two black-boxes are in evidence, with the explainable
                  system itself not subject to explanation itself. See for example https://fetch.ai
                Explainability is a key new area of research within the fields of artificial
               intelligence and machine-learning and argues that a computational system should be
               able to provide an explanation for an automated decision. This has become known as
               the problem of explainability for artificial intelligence research and has led to the
               emergence of the subfield of Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) (see also , , ). There
               has been an important theoretical distinction within this field of explainability
               between the notions of explanation and interpretation. An
               interpretable system can be understood as designed as a human-readable system from
               the bottom up. This often uses simple models, straightforward calculations or
               filtering which can be communicated easily. In contrast, an explainable system is a
               system that incorporates a secondary automated system, usually using machine
               learning, to machine-read and model the primary system, and thereby to provide an
               explanation of how this system works. Explainability has therefore emerged as a term
               that usually seeks to close an explanatory gap by means of responses generated by
               technology itself. As Rudin argues, the field of
                  interpretability / explainability / comprehensibility / transparency in machine
                  learning has strayed away from the needs of real problems…. Recent work on
                  explainability of black boxes – rather than interpretability of models – contains
                  and perpetuates critical misconceptions that have generally gone unnoticed, but
                  that can have a lasting negative impact on the widespread use of machine learning
                  models in society
               . Indeed, I argue that the idea of a technological
               response to an interpretability problem is doomed to failure while explainability is
               understood through such narrow technical criteria and instead requires
               interdisciplinary approaches(; see also ).
            The aim in this paper is to develop the insights developed through critical code
               studies which uses methods of interpretation and close reading of the code to
               contribute to re-thinking the notion of explainability by looking at a case study. In
               this paper I use explainability to gesture towards a method of tracing
               the underlying mechanisms and interactions within software towards an explanation of
               the functioning of the code. Within artificial intelligence, explainability is
               sometimes explicitly linked to automated processes of producing explanations, whereas
               interpretability is linked to human-readable code that is easily understood by a
               human programmer. In both cases an explanation is sought, so here I prefer to use the
               term explainability as a critical method for seeking an explanation, and
               highlight automated explainability where this is undertaken by software
               (Explainable AI). This can be usefully compared with interpretability as
               the use of a model for the code that is explicitly written to be easily read and
               understood by humans (Interpretable AI) (see ). Broadly
               speaking, explainability has tended to become an automated approach, and here I want
               to argue that if it were re-articulated through the concept of interpretability it
               could become a strong analytical method for reading computer code critically. I also
               hope to show that critical code studies and explainability are ways of thinking about
               the digital and computation that would be extremely useful for digital humanities
               more widely but also for STEM education and computer science more generally (see also
                  ). For an interesting discussion of the
                  value of the social sciences and interpretation to computer science see Connolly
                  2020. 
            
         

            1. Theoretical Context
            In this paper, therefore, I seek to widen explainability's applicability through
               Critical Code Studies and in doing so, to create connections to ideas of explanation,
               the paratextual
                  changed here and elsewhere from
                  extra-functional to avoid namespace confusion of computer source code, and
               the value of close-reading code as an explanatory approach. By the paratextual
               elements I am gesturing to the importance of a more capacious notion of source code
               that includes documentation, commentary, blog-posts and even social media related to
               the code. In this case I look at the WIT Toxicity Text Model
                  Comparison (What-If-Tool) developed by Jigsaw and Google (both units
               within Alphabet) that aims to classify toxic text in a dataset and which
               contains a remarkable normative structure incorporated into its algorithms.
                  Jigsaw is a unit within Google that explores threats to open
                     societies, and builds technology that inspires scalable solutions
                  . 
            
            Within the code that I examine in this paper, the notion of toxic and
                  toxicity and the relation of these words to their deployment in software
               are crucial for this analysis. By using approaches from critical code studies, the
               aim is to help explain how a machine learning model can classify toxicity by
               tracing the concept through layers of software, the so-called software stack, by
               close attention to the source code which serves as a document of its usage. The
                  word toxic is commonly defined as poisonous and first appeared in English in the mid-seventeenth century from the medieval
                     Latin toxicus, meaning poisoned or imbued with poison
                  . As Oxford Languages go on to explain, the medieval Latin term was in turn borrowed from the
                     Latin toxicum, meaning poison, which has its origins in the
                     Greek toxikon pharmakon – lethal poison used by the ancient Greeks for smearing
                     on the points of their arrows. Interestingly, it is not pharmakon, the word for
                     poison, that made the leap into Latin here, but toxikon, which comes from the
                     Greek word for bow, toxon
                  . That is that code can be made explainable by
               tracing concepts through a close reading of the source code.
            Critical code studies has been developed and supported by a range of scholars working
               particularly at the level of code to attempt to apply humanistic interpretative
               approaches to the study of the source code in computer systems. In providing
                  explanations of code, software and algorithms, and more generally in the case of
                  computational systems and platforms, the differing ways of presenting these
                  descriptions is reminiscent of the Rashomon Effect used in computer science
                  to discuss the multitude of different descriptions
                  presented by models (see ). The use of a cultural
                  artefact, in this case Rashomon, a Japanese film from 1950, directed by Akira
                  Kurosawa, as an explanatory device in statistics and computer science is itself
                  fascinating, although outside the scope of this paper.  One of the latest
               examples of this is Mark Marino’s Critical Code Studies
               which includes a number of examples of reading source code in practice . He writes,
            in our digital moment, there is a growing sense of the
                  significance of computer source code. It has moved beyond the realm of programmers
                  and entered the realm of mainstream media and partisan political blogosphere.
                  Those discussing code may not be programmers or have much fluency in the languages
                  of the code they are quoting, but they are using it to make, refute, and start
                  arguments. There is also a growing sense that the code we are not reading is
                  working against our interests.
               
            Marino’s approach foregrounds the use of case studies and close reading of the code
               to develop a number of strategies drawn from the humanities for understanding code.
               Indeed, he argues critical code studies was born of the
                  humanities
               . Essentially Marino foregrounds the importance
               of understanding and exegesis for this approach . 
            I would like to start with a discussion of this theoretical approach inasmuch as when
               we come to understand computer source code we are immediately faced with a dilemma in
               terms of a reading which is attentive to this interpretative dimension together with
               the explanatory aspect. In a sense I want to present a double aspect theory in
               relation to computer source code, in particular the way in which it is both a
               casual-deterministic mode of what we might call mechanical agency, and its
               interpretative mode of textuality. Marino highlights the understanding applied
               through approaches which privilege the interpretative dimension, but I argue it is
               crucial that we are able to move between these two aspects (explanatory/
               interpretative) if we are to provide a full account of computer code. This is also a
               useful distinction to make if we are to make sense of the current debates over
               explainability. We might note that a broadly interpretative approach which focuses on
               case studies may lose the explanatory aspect of the mechanical operation of computer
               code. In other words, it might lose the value of explaining why code has the
               structure it does and why a particular computer language has the value it does for
               its programmers, which could be its effective or expressive potentialities, for
               example. 
            In contrast I would like to use a realist notion of computer code, which
               involves an attempt to describe the real structures, entities, and processes that
               make up computer code and which exist independently of our descriptions of them. So,
               we should be attentive to the tendencies that emerge from the causal power of
               entities, structures, and mechanisms. That is, to focus on the real, operative
               mechanisms which may or may not produce observable results. This is because computer
               source code consists of a number of sub-systems which draw on a multiplicity of casual mechanisms at work at any time and can be
               explained through a broadly realist explanatory framework . This opens up a number of useful complements
               to interpretative approaches to understanding code because it allows reference to
               unobservable entities which go beyond our direct experience, and which therefore help
               to demonstrate the existence of non-obvious determinations of observable events
               within code in operation, or which can be inferred from the inclusions or references
               of programmers to paratexts in the code. This is not to descend into metaphysics,
               indeed one should follow the advice of Whitehead and avoid misplaced concreteness, that is, to too easily assume that concepts are
               entities that are unproblematically in existence. Here we might follow  and distinguish between realism about theories from realism about entities
               . As Outhwaite explains, to put it a bit crudely, true theories state what is the case. A realism about
                  entities simply asserts that some thing or things exist
               . In avoiding the notion of determinate
               entities we instead focus on the provisional understanding of computational
               structures and mechanisms. So that the practices of computer programmers and users
               cannot be understood except in terms of the computational structures within which
               they participate. This is to highlight how the explanatory dimension of computer code
               can usefully contribute to filling out interpretative textual approaches to
               understanding code. 
            In terms of understanding a particular case study of computer code, I therefore argue
               that we would need to include in any account of source code the explanatory layers
               that might be found upstream from the code under investigation. Not so much
               black-boxes as obscure networks of code which are formed from the social and economic
               factors (or para-textual elements) which surround code. This includes both networks
               in a technical sense, as the code is structured into self-standing objects, functions
               and applications, but also in a social sense, especially in terms of the social
               networks that are important in creating and maintaining the code in operation. These
               can be thought of as the infrastructures of code. These are instantiated within
               computational frameworks, operating system structures, data structures, language
               constraints, hardware specificities, or any number of wider sociological structures
               that might be not observable directly but which are sedimented within code downstream
               from these larger structural frameworks or the code situation with which we are
               working. Clearly, in this case the nature of the object should
                  determine the most appropriate methods of investigation in terms of the
               whether one attempts to determine micro or macro studies in relation to it . This brings forward the importance of the
               selection made as a researcher and the reflexivity that should be foregrounded in any
               analysis of critical code study. 
            Additionally, it is crucial to understand the conditions of action and the goals
               towards which a particular piece of code is aimed. The conditions or
                  goals may be defined as givens. If directed by a project or work situation
               these may often be fixed, unexaminable or relatively unchangeable. These conditions
               or goals defined as givens will therefore variously limit and constrain the resultant
               focus of the code and may impact directly the language choice, framework, approach
               and dependencies used. They can usually be discerned in the surrounding documentation
               of code or in the comments where programmers often highlight the direction of
               processing and its intended function. Indeed, sometimes programmers may express their
               feeling or complain about the code quite explicitly if they feel constrained by the
               framework or language choice foisted upon them (see ). Some organisations also have a house style of code, which guides the
               choice of words representing variables, capitalisation, functional relations (e.g.,
               internal libraries and dependencies), commenting practices and even the formatting of
               the code. This may be an established or published naming and coding standard within
               an organisation. But any bureaucratic discipline laid on the coding practices and
               source-code format is grounded in the expectation of resistance. Indeed, source code
               can sometimes reveal the pressures between technical practice and bureaucratic
               limitation, most notably expressed in the comments sections, or sometimes in variable
               naming. However, if the code produced is too much at variance with the style or
               practices of an organisation then there can be a return of the repressed in
               which the repressed element of the freedom of the programmer in a house style
               may manifest itself in idiosyncratic code or resistance expressed in the coding (see
                  ). Indeed, the fundamental repression on
               which bureaucratic organisations are based on, in terms of standardisation and
               process management, may surface when programmers stray too far from the limits set by
               organisations and result in heavy-handed responses including possible expulsion of
               the programmer from a project, or even their termination of employment. Hence, to
               avoid conflict in technical work such as programming a certain degree of autonomy
               tends to be present and the bureaucratic concern with the software may leave the
               technical process to the programmer and confine judgement to the appraisal of the
               final code product. By the means of assessment by result, normal bureaucratic
               management can be maintained over software development. This is helpful for critical
               code studies as within the source code there can often be traces left behind which
               give clues as to the way in which a particular algorithm was formulated, the
               assumptions or limitations of the code, and occasionally the conflictual aspects of
               code-writing which are documented in comments. 
            Within the source code although we can sometimes observe this conflict play out, but
               more often code is presented in the form of a prosaic matter-of-factness stripped of
               its individuality. It has, so to speak, been painted grey in grey, as Hegel observed
               about uncreative philosophy. This common style in programming, which we might call
                  coding from nowhere is seen where code is presented as apolitical,
               disinterested and placed above struggle. Many examples of this can be seen in
               open source and free software projects where the values of the project may be more
               easily observed in the code, documentation and debates that are often freely
               available to examine on mailing lists and social media (see ). As we will see in the case of the code later examined in this paper, although a
               technical project might aim to align with the interests, values and goals of society
               in terms of notions of communicative discussion free from domination, which in this
               case they define as toxicity, close reading the code demonstrates the devotion
               of the programmers to the development of means and instruments. By focussing on
               technical means they thereby repress the ends and morality they purport to support.
               Indeed, in this case the code acts to automate the processes of judgement over the
                  toxicity of online discussions creating abstractions and a misplaced
               concreteness which results in a simplistic binary characterisation of discourse. That
               is, the models either find a comment toxic or not toxic. This process of technical
               hollowing out of the ends is also apparent in the processes of debiasing one of the
               text models, by application of a set of weightings on crowd-sourced judgements of
               self-declared identity characteristics, in an attempt to normalise model judgements.
               The technical regress this opens up is clear when one asks who debiases the
                  debiasers? An attempt to deal with this regress was the Civil Comments
                  project which used peer-review of human moderators to manage the process of
                  preventing uncivil commenting in a discussion. However, as they observed, as much as everyone might like to see higher-quality, less-toxic
                     comments on their favorite news sites, the reality is that the number of sites
                     willing and able to pay for comments software of any quality is not large, or
                     growing
                  . Revealingly this project folded as although
                  everyone claims to want better quality online discussions few are willing to pay
                  for it . Nonetheless Civil Comments chose to make
                  their ~2m public comments from their platform available in an open archive
                  available at https://figshare.com/articles/dataset/data_json/7376747 . See also Coral
                  for another project with similar aims, https://coralproject.net
                A question, incidentally that the system builders do not tend to ask.
                  One way in which the datasets are debiased is by running competitions, such as the
                  Jigsaw Unintended Bias in Toxicity Classification Challenge where an open
                  competition is run over to stages with an award of $65,000 split over four prizes
                  to the best algorithms that debiase data. The challenge states, you're challenged to build a model that recognizes toxicity and
                     minimizes this type of unintended bias with respect to mentions of
                     identities, see https://www.kaggle.com/c/jigsaw-unintended-bias-in-toxicity-classification/overview
                To paraphrase György Lukács, who sarcastically lampooned the debates of the
               Frankfurt School philosophers in the 1930s who would build critical theories whilst
               enjoying a privileged economic condition, we might say that machine learning is
               similarly a beautiful hotel, equipped with every comfort, on the edge of an abyss, of
               nothingness, of absurdity. 
         

            2. Reading Code
            I now want to turn from this theoretical and methodological discussion to look at how
               these insights might inform a realist critical code studies reading of code. The aim
               is to think about the way in which a notion of explainability can be incorporated
               into a reading of a source code corpus. Due to limitations of space, I narrow the
               focus to look at an explanation of how toxicity itself is deployed and
               understood in the code under review. To do this I look at the What-If Tool toxicity text model comparison text-processing project.
                  https://colab.research.google.com/github/pair-code/what-if-tool/blob/master/WIT_Toxicity_Text_Model_Comparison.ipynb#scrollTo=UiNxsd4_q9wq
               This uses a tool developed by Google, called the What-if
                  Tool, that allows a user to,
            test performance in hypothetical situations, analyze the
                  importance of different data features, and visualize model behavior across
                  multiple models and subsets of input data, and for different ML fairness metrics.
                  
            The What-if Tool offers a range of
                  interactive visualizations and guided explorations of a TensorFlow model, allowing
                  developers to explore how their model interpreted its training data and how subtle
                  changes to a given input would change its classification
               . The WIT Toxicity Text Model Comparison (TTMC) uses this
                  What-if Tool to compare two text
                  models from ConversationAI that determine sentence toxicity, one of which has had
                  some debiasing performed during training
               . This is quite a complex piece of software, drawing on a
               number of libraries and data sources, and applied to the wikipedia comments
                  dataset. Text processing involves mechanical processing of text data to
                  classify it in particular ways. This is different to text understanding which
                  seeks to provide an understanding of the meaning within textual materials. In the
                  code discussed here, the aim is the mechanical identification of toxicity
                  rather than understanding it within context.  This dataset is a tsv file
               which includes over 100k labeled discussion comments from
                  English Wikipedia. Each comment was labeled by multiple annotators via Crowdflower
                  on whether it is a toxic or healthy contribution
               .  A tsv file is a tab-separated values
                  (TSV) file which is a simple text format for storing data in a tabular structure,
                  for example, database table or spreadsheet data, so that it can be transferred
                  between different programs or systems. In a tsv file each record in a source table
                  or database record is represented as one line of the text file. The TSV files are
                  similar to CSV files but use tabs instead of commas to separate the data.
               Essentially this is a dataset with labelling using a machine learning model trained
               by crowd-sourced using a simple machine learning classifier based on a set of 4053
               people being asked whether a comment on Wikipedia contained a personal attack or
               harassment . See also  for the Wikipedia Talk Labels:
                     Personal Attacks dataset.  This was enumerated in one of five
               sub questions for classification by the programmers, see figure 1. 
            
               The question posed to Crowdflower annotators (, )
               Screenshot of question Does the comment contain a
                     personal attack or harrassment? with five response options.
               
            
            It is important to note that the machine learning model applied to the wikipedia
               comments dataset by Crowdflower is different from the ones tested in the TTMC tool.
               Crucially it is the result of a different crowd-sourcing process and therefore the
               concept of toxic in the dataset is different to the concept of toxic
               used in the TTMC. Nonetheless the Crowdflower toxicity classification is left as a
               trace, or data field, in the dataset tsv file. This Crowdflower toxicity
               classification is then utilised in the TTMC tool as a static value so that it can be
               compared to the other models it compares. Although complex, understanding the
               different ways in which toxicity is being algorithmically produced as a value
               is an important part of making an explanatory account of this code. 
            The WIT Toxicity Text Model Comparison is hosted on the Google Colab or Colaboratory
               which is a free Jupyter notebook environment that runs in the cloud on a browser and
               stores its notebooks on Google Drive. Jupyter Notebook is a web-based interactive
               computational environment for creating and running notebook documents, which are
               browser-based REPL (Read–eval–print loops) containing an
                  ordered list of input/output cells and which can contain code, text, mathematics,
                  plots and rich media
               . This environment allows the development of code in an
               interactive fashion and has become very popular as a way of doing data science and
               other programming activities which are exploratory. The ease with which a Jupyter
               notebook can work with data and code allows a program to be viewed, edited and run in
               real-time to test ideas. This means that it is an ideal environment for facilitating
               critical code studies projects. 
            
               The What-If Tool Data Visualiser
               Screenshot of dataviz interface with configuration on left and scatterplot
                  on right.
               
            
            The main part of the analysis of the WIT Toxicity Text Model Comparison compares two
               models drawn from ConversationAI, an initiative to protect
                  voices in conversation, to apply to the Wikipedia comments dataset.
               ConversationAI claims to develop tools so that globally, fewer
                  people are silenced and more people are able to safely engage in good faith
                  discussion online. The project presents its values as: Community:
                  Communities should responsibly shape their discussions; Transparency: Open
                  processes enable better outcomes and trust; Inclusivity: Diverse points of view
                  make discussions better; Privacy: We are privacy conscious in design and
                  execution; Topic-neutral: Good faith discussion can happen on controversial topics
                     . They further argue that their team
                  leads as an example of ethical practices in building
                  technology
               . ConversationAI is made up of three main
                  parts, (1) Perspective API which API uses machine learning to
                     analyze a string of text and predict the perceived impact it might have on a
                     conversation, (2) Tune, which is a Chrome
                     extension that helps people adjust the level of toxicity they see in comments
                     across the internet, and (3) Moderator, which is an open-source tool that uses machine learning to help moderators identify and
                     reduce toxicity in forums and comment sections
                  . ConversationAI is developed by Jigsaw
               and the Google Counter-Abuse Technology Team and hosted on GitHub.
            The two main pre-trained models used in the analysis are cnn_wiki_tox_v3_model.h5 and
                  cnn_debias_tox_v3_model.h5. See https://storage.googleapis.com/what-if-tool-resources/computefest2019/cnn_wiki_tox_v3_model.h5
                  and https://storage.googleapis.com/what-if-tool-resources/computefest2019/cnn_debias_tox_v3_model.h5
                The latter has had debiasing performed during its training. Both models are
               convolutional neural network models, accessed using the Kera open-source software
               library (see  for a comprehensive explanation of generating
               models from sentence templates). A good overview of convolutional neural
                  network models can be found at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convolutional_neural_network
                CNNs work by modelling animal visual perception, and can therefore be applied
               to automatic recognition of patterns. CNNs are made up of multiple layers of
               individual software sensory neurons (so-called receptive fields, which are made up of
               clusters of these neurons). The word convolution comes from its use to
               describe a mathematical operation on two functions which produces a third function.
               These models were created for the Computefest 2019 conference using a set of Sentence
               Templates datasets developed by Jigsaw which have been generated
                  by plugging identity terms, occupations, and modifiers into a set of templates,
                  e.g., I am a <modifier> <identity>, to form test
                  sentences. They claim that As only the identity term
                  varies, examples using the same template — e.g., I am a kind American
                  and I am a kind Muslim — should return similar toxicity scores.
                  Scores that vary significantly may indicate identity term bias within the
                  model
               . As can already be seen from this initial simple
               mapping of the software, there are a number of complex dependencies between the
               software being looked at, namely the WIT Toxicity Text Model Comparison, and the way
               in which it draws on a software toolkit, (the What-If Tool), other models
               (ConversationAI), Sentence Templates (Jigsaw), software libraries (Keras), and
               datasets shared on figshare (Wikipedia Talk Labels). 
            In developing a notion of explainability that considers the specificity of software
               system design and operation we can draw from Manovich’s principles of new media which
               he outlines as (1) numerical representation, (2) modularity, (3) automation, (4)
               variability and (5) transcoding . In reading
               the TTMC code I want to particularly focus on the principle of modularity to help
               trace concepts. Complex software such as the TTMC is often built on a number of
               layers which can be understood as akin to a building, with higher levels of the code
               resting on lower levels until eventually a key foundational level might be discerned.
               This forms part of the practice of well-structured modularity in code that enables
               software abstraction to be used whilst also simplifying complexity and creating more
               maintainable code bases. A key methodological practice I want to use here is the
               tracing of a fundamental organising concept used, often unproblematically in higher
               levels of the code, back to its original specification or construction. This is made
               easier in well-structured code as the different layers of the software can be
               understood as distinct and performing low-, mid-, or high-level processing functions.
               Using this modular principle in the interpretative practice can help explain the code
               functioning and provide a method for tracing conceptual usage within and across
               software. 
            In the case of TTMC, the code level at which the comparison tool is accessed directly
               makes use of a key framing concept and deploys it in its code operations which are
               then spread horizontally and vertically through the source code. Due to limitations
               of space I can only give limited textual examples from the source code, but my aim is
               to trace how toxicity becomes instantiated within the code, losing its nuance and
               context. By allowing the constellation of code, libraries and data formed around it
               to reify it into a thing that can be calculated and used to test other textual
               discourse we are able to see how a social concept becomes concretised into a
               technical concept of toxicity. The first place we see the introduction of this
               concept is within the form Read the dataset from CSV and process
                  it for model in the code cells of the TTMC, 
            # Read the dataset from the provided CSV and print out information about it.
df = pd.read_csv(csv_path, names=csv_columns, skipinitialspace=True)
df = df[['is_toxic', 'comment']]

            This code simply reads in the data from the wiki dataset and adds it to a
               dataframe(df).

            label_column = 'is_toxic'
make_label_column_numeric(df, label_column, lambda val: val)

            This is then labelled and turned into a numeric field as is_toxic is a value
               either 0 or 1. This is drawn from the Wikipedia Comments Corpus and available on
               Figshare . To generate the Wikipedia
                  Comments Corpus made up of discussion comments, 
                  processed a public dump of the full history of English Wikipedia. The corpus
                  contains 63 million comments from discussions relating to user pages and articles
                  dating from 2004-2015. They used human annotators and machine learning to classify
                  comments to identify certain forms of behaviour to understand with the aim of
                  reducing the level of what they describe as toxic
                     discussions in online fora . Toxicity in
                  this work is linked to user behaviour, and each user is assigned a toxicity level used to understand and predict user
                  behaviour.  It is important to note that in this corpus the problem of
               identifying personal attacks is treated as a binary text classification problem, 
            toxicity: Indicator variable for whether the worker thought the
               comment is toxic. The annotation takes on the value 1 if the worker considered the
               comment toxic (i.e worker gave a toxicity_score less than 0) and value 0 if the
               worker considered the comment neutral or healthy (i.e worker gave a toxicity_score
               greater or equal to 0). Takes on values in {0, 1}. (, )
            We should note that the toxicity defined from the wiki dataset is already normalised
               to a binary true or false value and that the majority of the toxicity calculation in
               this dataset was created using the machine learning model described above. However,
               nowhere in this code level is toxicity defined or explained, to understand this key
               concept for the code we will need to widen our investigation to one of the key
               dependencies within the ConversationAI models and look to another project . By accessing the click through link to the source
               code in Github we find the underlying ConversationAI code . Within the file
               unintended_ml_bias/new_madlibber/madlibber.py we find, 

            self.__template_word_categories = set([]) 
self.__toxicity = set(["toxic," "nontoxic"])

            As explained in a comment in the files fat-star-bias-measurement-tutorial.ipynb
               and
               FAT_Star_Tutorial_Measuring_Unintended_Bias_in_Text_Classification_Models_with_Real_Data.ipynb, 
            
               "Let's examine some rows in these datasets. Note that columns like toxicity and
                  male are percent scores.\n,"
               "* toxicity: this is the percentage of raters who labeled this comment as being
                  toxic.\n,"
            
            However, the definition of toxicity, beyond a percentage value, is under specified
               and again we are required to dig deeper into the code dependencies where in the
               ConversationAI Perspective API we find a definition. However we might note the
               beginning of a slippage between the definition of toxicity as a thing and toxicity as
               a probability value. In the ConversationAI system toxicity is defined as
                  as a rude, disrespectful, or unreasonable comment that is
                  likely to make someone leave a discussion
               . Toxicity’s effects are understood as, 
            stop[ing] people from engaging in conversation and, in extreme
               cases, [it] forces people offline. We’re finding new ways to reduce toxicity, and
               ensure everyone can safely participate in online conversations. 
            Perspective API also helpfully documents how its model is able to classify text into
               a number of different outputs, all of which are interesting in and of themselves, but
               here it is the Toxicity value that we are investigating (see figure 2) (see also ). Interestingly the Severe_Toxicity output is the
                  result of a more recent model which deals with the problems of the original
                  Toxicity model so that it identifies a very hateful,
                     aggressive, disrespectful comment or otherwise very likely to make a user leave
                     a discussion or give up on sharing their perspective. This attribute is much
                     less sensitive to more mild forms of toxicity, such as comments that include
                     positive uses of curse words
                  . This the developers describe as
                     a different experimental model that detects more severe
                     toxicity and is less sensitive to milder toxicity
                  . Clearly the same problems of definition and meaning
                  are apparent in both Toxicity and Severe_Toxicity scores. 
            
            
               Overview of Perspective API 
               Chart showing Perspective API's process of calculating toxicity based on
                  input
               
            
            Using the machine learning model the Perspective API returns what they call the
                  flagship Toxicity attribute
               . The further one digs into the ConversationAI
               documentation the more slippery the notion of toxicity becomes, from either 0 or 1 in
               the TTMC tool (and drawn from the Wikimedia dataset) to toxicity as a perception
               probability between 0 and 1. The documentation explains, the
                     model output is a probability. As such, a comment with a TOXICITY score of 0.9
                     is not necessarily more toxic than a comment with a TOXICITY score of 0.7.
                     Rather, it’s more likely to be perceived as toxic by readers.
                  
            
               Toxicity Calculation 
               Input of Shut up, you're an idiot! shown with levels of Toxicity,
                  Sexually Explicit, Profanity, Insult, and Threat given as decimal
                  values.
               
            
            As we move through the layers of the code, and indeed through the layers of meaning
               attached to the notion of toxicity we find that the inputs to the toxicity
               value eventually start to hit what we might call a humanistic level. That is, the
               actual source of the value is revealed as a calculation based on a set of human users
               asked to review and annotate a comment dataset. 
            Each comment is tagged by 3-10 crowdsourced raters from Figure
                  Eight, Appen and internal platforms. The raters tag whether or not a comment
                  contains an attribute (e.g., TOXICITY). We then post-process the tags to obtain
                  labels corresponding to the ratio of raters who tagged a comment as toxic. For
                  example, we label a comment as 0.6 for TOXICITY if 6 out of 10 raters tagged a
                  comment as toxic.
               
            Here we are not given the actual datasets which underlie the model, and we are only
               told they are drawn from a variety of sources, including
                  comments from online forums such as Wikipedia (CC-BY-SA3 license) and The New York
                  Times
               . However, we do discover that toxicity is a
               calculated numeric value, so if 6 out of 10 raters tagged a comment as
                  toxic it would be assigned a value of 0.6 toxicity and if 4 out of 10
                  raters tagged it, then it would be given 0.4 toxicity. So the toxicity
               value is not, as one might assume, that the greater the value the higher its
               toxicity, rather that it merely indicates the number of raters as a percentage who
               thought a comment was toxic, and the number of raters
               per comment averaged between 3-10 people looking at the comment. This implies that
               comments may actually be rated by different numbers of people, which therefore
               implies the toxicity ratings between comments are also not directly
               comparable. 
            As far as I was able to discern, there is no indication of the number of raters per
               comment in the dataset, so already toxicity has been abstracted from the underlying
               concrete data. Jigsaw claims elsewhere that toxicity is a global
                  problem, and has potentially dire consequences for freedom of expression
               and that toxicity is pervasive online
               . However, using Jigsaw’s own definition of toxicity as a
               percentage of the number of commentators on a crowd-sourced platform between 3-10 who
               thought a comment would cause someone to leave a conversation, then these claims seem
               somewhat confused.
         

            3. Discussion
            One of the key issues that remains problematic in these the models is not only is
               toxicity treated as a binary value but they classify toxicity out of context as a
               text processing issue through a form of feature analysis. One of the
               side-effects of this approach is that sentence classification can produce unintended
               and sometimes discriminatory or biased outcomes. Indeed, Jigsaw explain, higher numbers represent a higher likelihood that the patterns in
                  the text resemble patterns in comments that people have tagged as toxic. The
                  number is not a score of how toxic a particular entry is
               . A result of this approach is that the model can produce
               not so much toxicity classifications as what have been identified as
                  biased results, as documented by Jessamyn West and shown in figure 4. 
            
               PerspectiveAPI results 
               Two tables of about 30 sentences with seen as toxic ratings, e.g.
                  from I am a man = 20% to I am a
                     gay black woman = 87%.
               
            
            Jigsaw developers in responding to these results explained, identity terms for more frequently targeted groups (e.g., words like
                     black,
                  muslim,
                  feminist,
                  woman,
                  gay etc) often have higher scores because comments about those groups are
                  over-represented in abusive and toxic comments
               . This means that the data Jigsaw used to train their
               machine learning models have the same problem and the names of targeted groups appear
               far more often in abusive comments in the dataset they compiled. As the training data
               used to train their machine learning models contain these comments, the machine
               learning models adopt these biases in the underlying
                  distributions, picking up negative connotations as they go. When there’s
                  insufficient diversity in the data, the models can over-generalize and make these
                  kinds of errors
               . They further explained, 
            After the initial launch of Perspective API in 2017, users
               discovered a positive correlation between identity terms containing information on
               race or sexual orientation and toxicity score. For example, the phrase "I am a gay
               Black woman" received a high toxicity score. In this case, the identity terms are not
               being used pejoratively, so this example was classified incorrectly. 
            And further that,
            The source of the error was the training data itself — the training
               set did not contain sufficient examples of nontoxic comments containing identity
               terms for the model to learn that the terms themselves were neutral. This was because
               the vast majority of usage of these words in online forums is toxic — the model was
               truly reflecting the state of the world. But the context of that usage matters .
            As a result of these criticisms, Jigsaw has created a debiased ConversationAI model
               which attempts to mitigate some of these problems. So toxicity is reweighted
               to take account of identity characteristics in calculating the toxicity value. In
               essence it is the original and the debiased model that the TTMC software is comparing
               and which enables the slightly different toxicity classifications to be compared and
               visualised for exploration. But again, this is not made clear in the ConversationAI
               models descriptions, and clearly there is a very different notion of toxicity being
               produced in each of the models. One wonders, with all the problems of
                  definition, why use the term toxicity at all for this code? There may,
                  perhaps, be a cultural explanation that helps us understand this. Toxic was a word
                  that was clearly in the air whilst this software was being developed. The word
                     toxic was noted by Oxford University Press to have increased in usage
                  dramatically prior to and during 2018 . With the
                  Novichok poisoning in the UK toxic chemicals were widely reported in the news,
                  together with toxic chemical stockpiles, toxic substances following hurricanes in
                  the US and toxic waste in India being reported. Toxic gases were discussed and
                  toxic air was a public health concern especially in relation to air quality. The
                  toxic algae disaster in Florida and had a central role in the state’s Senate
                  mid-terms race. Additionally, the notion of a toxic environment and the effect on
                  workplace mental health and worries about toxic culture in corporations, such as
                  Google were in the news. Toxic relationships were identified in relation to
                  family, partners and politicians and the notion of toxic masculinity became much
                  discussed following the #MeToo movement. It was no surprise therefore that
                     toxic was chosen as word of the year in 2018 by the Oxford English
                  Dictionary because it was an intoxicating descriptor for the
                     year’s most talked about topics and the sheer
                     scope of its application
                  .
            
            Jigsaw explains that research suggested that toxicity is an easy
                  concept for annotators to understand and therefore it
                  was easier for more people to agree on what constituted toxic speech —
                  comments likely to make someone leave a conversation — than it was for people to
                  agree on other terms to describe problematic comments
               . Jigsaw reference a study conducted in December 2018 by
               the Anti-Defamation League which they claim shows that marginalized groups
               experienced the most toxicity online, however the report does not use the term
                  toxicity, preferring to use the terms hate or harassment (see
                  ). The notion of toxicity which appears to be a
               quasi-scientific metric for analysis through the machine learning models increasingly
               begins to look less stable as a descriptor. Toxicity, as Jigsaw themselves
               acknowledge, was a term that was easy for people to understand as comments likely to make someone leave a conversation. This
               enabled easier classification by the human raters, and was, therefore, simpler to use
               to train the machine learning model or use it beyond limited specific contexts (for
               example, see ). Detecting whether a user
                  leaves a conversation is a much simpler and less computational complex question
                  than attempting to understand the sophisticated deployment of language by human
                  participants in a conversation. In effect it becomes a binary question of
                  leaves-conversation/stays-in-conversation which is much easier to recognise and
                  automate using software. This is, of course, an example of reductionism in
                  computation. Along the way, the notion of toxicity develops a much
               more scientific connotation as it is mediated through the black-boxes of
               ConversationAI and Perspective. 
            In other words, through coding into software, a poorly defined term
               (toxicitiy) becomes reinforced into a set of software functions, which through
               layering and the resultant obscuring of the action of the functions, becomes a
               definitional and categorical classifier which is then applied unreflexively to text.
               Without attention to the way in which code can legitimate and operationalise concepts
               in particularly instrumental ways, we stand to lose the subtle interpretative
               flexibility of language use in particular contexts. In this example, toxicity, which
               is defined and implemented as a particular operational function, shifts subtlety into
               a claim for rhadamanthine code and software able to determine or judge language use
               which in actuality it does not have a strong claim to identify, namely hate or
                  harassment. This is a problem common across the domain of machine learning
               and artificial intelligence, which often over-claims and under-delivers on its
               promise to provide solutions to complex problems. 
         

            4. Conclusion
            In this article I have attempted to demonstrate the value of focussing on the source
               code using a method of critical explainability in order to explore specific
               transformations of meaning in code. This method enables a set of principles that can
               be deployed in reading computational artifacts including: (1) criticism of
               computational systems which is not afraid of the results it arrives at, nor conflicts
               with power structures that it might encounter, (2) a distrust of closed-systems and
               hidden structures, (3) a striving for open-mindedness in relation to a readiness to
               revise its approach, methods and theories, (4) a suspicion of metaphysical or
               idealist approaches to understanding computation (e.g., the invasion of myth into
               understanding software, code and algorithms), (5) a standpoint that challenges
               irrationalism in relation to understanding computation, and lastly (6) a belief in
               the value of seeking defensible explanatory and interpretative accounts of systems,
               objects, networks, and other computationally mediated structures. 
            As shown in this paper, the TTMC automates the decision as to whether a comment in a
               text is classified as toxic or not. But the coding of toxicity is not a
               simple matter and its deployment in this and related software dependencies requires
               explanation. By drawing on normative notions from explainability and
               interpretability, which highlights the need for an answer to the why question,
               we can ask why code functions in a particular way. We can also outline how it does
               this by following the logic of the code through the various layers of the software.
               By analysing the source code and other related contextual documentation, new readings
               of the assumptions sedimented within the code are revealed. Indeed, when elements of
               discourse are computationally measured it can transform and refigure our concepts, as
               shown in the example of toxicity here. A key methodological contribution of
               this paper is to show how concept formation can be traced through key categories and
               classifications deployed in code structures (e.g., modularity and layering software)
               but also how these classifications can appear more stable than they actually are by
               the tendency of software layers to obscure even as they reveals One might also
                  note the extra-algorithmic discursive elements of textual descriptions which
                  surround the code on webpages and in the code archives which obfuscate, or even
                  provide minimal and contradictory explanation of, what toxicity is. These
                  textual elements, and here I do not mean code commentary but rather the more
                  general textual penumbra, can also serve to shape or direct human interpretation
                  of the code functionality. This might be helpfully thought of as the difference
                  between the hard-core of a computational system (e.g., the code) and the soft-core
                  (e.g., the surrounding documentation, the textual descriptions and the marketing
                  materials around a system).  Much work remains in developing methods for
               working with code, especially as it becomes of more archival and historical interest.
               Approaches, such as the one developed in this article, will be needed by the digital
               humanities and other humanistic fields to trace and interpret code. Critical code
               studies by working with the methodological principle that source code can inform our
               understanding of computation and digital culture is an important field for
               contributing to these debates. 
         
