Title:  Canonical References in Electronic Texts: Rationale and Best
               Practices
Volume:  008
Issue:  2
Date:  18 July 2014
Abstract:  
            
            Systems of canonical references, whereby segments of written works are sequentially
               labeled with numbers or letters to facilitate cross-referencing, are widely used but
               seldom studied, undeservedly so. Canonical numbers are complex interpretive
               mechanisms with a great deal of potential for anyone editing and using electronic
               texts. In this essay I consider the rationale for and nature of canonical reference
               systems, to recommend principles to consider when deploying them in digital projects.
               After briefly reviewing the history of canonical references I note how they have been
               used so far, emphasizing the advances made by Canonical Text Services (CTS). I argue
               that the practical and theoretical problems that remain unaddressed require
               engagement with descriptions of how textual scholarship works and how notional
               literary works relate to the artefacts that carry them (using Functional Requirements
               for Bibliographic Records, FRBR). By correlating a theory of canonical reference
               numbers with those two models — editorial workflow and creative works — I offer key
               principles that should be addressed when planning, writing, and using digital
               projects. 
         
Full Body Text: 


            The rationale of canonical references
            Canonical references — e.g., Homer, Iliad 1.1; John
               3:16; Sun Zu, The Art of War 3.6, Hamlet, Act III Scene 2 line 1895 — allow one to point to and discuss
               specific parts of literary works without having to stipulate a particular edition or
               version. Such numbers arose in earnest in the Renaissance as a way to place firm
               anchors in a fluctuating sea of texts, and have ever since been a critical means of
               cross-referencing. In the electronic age the textual sea has grown larger and more
               turbulent, so the anchors provided by canonical numbers are arguably more important
               now than ever, especially for scholarship. 
            For example, formal linguistic research into translations, paraphrases, and other
               acts of textual reuse depends upon the alignment of large corpora of texts. The
               preparatory stages for so-called bitext alignment are notoriously time-consuming . There exist good stochastic methods to synchronize
               large units (paragraphs, sentences), but correcting the low level of errors still
               takes work. And by the time the bitexts have been aligned on this rough level, the
               end result is, in essence, a canonical numbering system, usually invented ad hoc and
               incorporated into other projects only after custom conversion.
            Canonical reference systems also continue to facilitate everyday discourse about
               familiar literature. A Web publisher can install a javascript library such as reftagger.com's to automatically add
               widgets and hyperlinks to inline, naturally phrased canonical references that appear
               in individual pages. A writer doesn't need to do any special coding when quoting, and
               readers, through hover and click events, can consult the work that has been cited, in
               the language or version of choice. Such javascript libraries, which are always
               restricted to a particular textual corpus, would be impossible without the shared
               convention of canonical numbers.
            A shared universal protocol for canonical numbers in electronic texts — some protocol
               readable by both computers and humans — would bring enormous benefit to linguists,
               digital humanists, and the public at large. But the challenges in finding such a
               protocol, as I will explain, are numerous and significant. Rather than tackling those
               challenges directly, I step back in this article to explore the history, theory, and
               assumptions that underlie canonical numbers. Briefly setting them in historical
               context, I trace recent efforts to make them viably interoperable in digital
               projects. Initiatives such as Canonical Text Services have made critical advances,
               but important theoretical and practical questions remain. I argue that these problems
               are best understood against two backdrops: the process editors follow in their
               textual scholarship, and the model library cataloguers have used to describe creative
               works (Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records, FRBR). I argue that a
               comparison shows exactly where each of the two major classes of canonical numbers —
               visual and semantic — are best suited. Finally, I detail principles that can help
               digital humanists make the most of canonical numbers in electronic texts. Those
               recommendations can be summarized here:
            
               
                  Innovations in the number and specificity of canonical numbering systems
                     have historically capitalized on new technology. That trend should be
                     encouraged, not hindered.
                  Both writers and users of textual data should declare in a computer-parsable
                     manner the numbering schemes they have adopted, the type of each number, and
                     any related normalizations applied to the texts.
                  Numbering schemes both point to texts and interpret them. The first function
                     requires stable and familiar numbers; the latter, the freedom to bring new
                     insight into text structures. Digital projects should accommodate both impulses
                     whenever possible.
                  The distinction between visual and semantic numbering should always be kept
                     in mind when creating data models and creating and using data. Neither type of
                     number is inherently superior. The suitability of a particular system depends
                     upon the assumptions and purposes of editors and researchers. Specifically: 
                        Semantic numbering schemes are a heuristic ideally suited for
                           knowledge, meaning, and insight; visual ones, for text-bearing
                           objects.
                        Semantic numbering schemes are easier to apply across multiple
                           versions of a work than visual ones are.
                        Visual numbering systems are easier and less controversial to
                           fine-tune with increased specificity than semantic ones are.
                     
                  

               
            
            My goal in this article is not to establish a definitive approach to employing
               canonical numbers. The problems, which I think remain numerous and complex, deserve
               sustained reflection. This essay is best seen as a catalyst to that reflection, and
               to experimentation in different practical solutions.
         

            The complex tradition of canonical numbers
            In antiquity, cross-referencing and text segmenting were two unrelated activities.
               The former was served by quotations, paraphrases, allusions, and other types of
               textual reuse, a flexible system that allowed (as it still does) authors a great deal
               of control over the quality, precision, and character of their references. Text
               segmentation, however, began as a way not to provide anchors for reference but to
               shape the semantic contours of the text. Large works would be divided into books or
               poems, e.g., the Iliad and the Histories of Herodotus, and smaller units were marked with individual
               symbols (e.g., ※, ⁖) that identified
               paragraph-sized units , . Such segmentation, which relied upon marks that could not be sequenced, signaled
               the borders of logical or semantic units and furnished scribes or writers the means
               by which to shape their readers' interpretation of the text , .The best
                  research on the topic has come from the Pericope Group, http://www.pericope.net/, in their
                  eponymous monograph series.
            
            The use of numbers or letters, instead of symbols, so that sub-book units could be
               uniquely and sequentially labeled, is not attested until the Hellenistic/late antique
               period, with the numbering of Greek lyric poetry , the
               subsequent imitative numbering of the ancient Greek translation of the Hebrew Psalter
                  , and the numbered division of the four New
               Testament gospels into titloi and kephalaia, a
               structure that became an integral part of the canon tables invented by Eusebius of
               Caesarea (ca. 260–339/40) , . Eusebius's technique for numbering the parts of the four
               gospels could not have existed without the invention of the codex, a book format much
               easier than a scroll was for looking up references. The function was important to
               Eusebius's clientele, because the traditional methods of cross-reference — direct and
               indirect quotation — were not helpful for clergy who needed to quickly and
               conveniently find the Gospel passages designated for reading on a particular day. So
               the beginnings of what we know now as canonical reference systems emerged within the
               confluence of, among other things, new needs and new technology.My position
                  does not imply determinism. Although the technology was a necessary condition for
                  innovations in canonical numbers, it was not a sufficient one (else Eusebius's
                  tables would have been invented centuries earlier). I exclude from this narrative
                  stichometry, another equally ancient counting technique in which lines on a scroll
                  were tabulated to estimate scribal costs. There is no evidence that stichometric
                  sums served any labeling or indexical function; the only number that mattered —
                  the total — held no value outside any single scroll except as a rough estimate of
                  how long a work was , critiqued by . 
            
            Segmenting and numbering works developed only sporadically and piecemeal through the
               late antique and early medieval period, gaining traction only later and in specific
               locales, particularly thirteenth-century Paris . This
               late refinement of numbering schemes was again facilitated (but not determined) by
               social and technological developments such as the transition from scriptoria to a
               highly specialized bookmaking industry, which was eventually succeeded by the first
               printing shops . In this case the enrichment of numbering
               systems was motivated by pedagogy and scholarship, not liturgy. University scholars
               and students who wished to discuss and compare a text and its translation, e.g., a
               Hebrew work translated into Latin, required a rough method of alignment, and the best
               coordinating mechanism was to number the text segments and promulgate the system
               through the managed production and distribution of books .Eusebius's canon tables are the best-attested early example (Eusebius,
                     Life of Constantine 4.36–37) but are also an
                  anomaly that highlights the significance of much later developments. Although the
                  tables were widely replicated across a host of New Testament manuscripts, they
                  have widely divergent readings. The variety is so complex that a critical edition,
                  a sine qua non for determining how, when, and where the tables were actually used,
                  is being prepared only now, by Martin Wallraff.  Broad consensus about
               numbering schemes, and the creation of complex hierarchies of small textual parts
               (e.g., subchapters) occurred only in the modern era, with the printing press, which
               helped stabilize clear, fixed reference systems . Long
               columns of a printed book could be marked by intercolumnar letters, and individual
               page or chapter lines could be numbered, each copy guaranteed to be identical. 
            Ancient texts critically edited in the modern era are pinned to the scaffolding of
               numbering schemes that have come to be called canonical, much in the same special
               sense Eusebius used κανών . That is, canonical
               numbers refer not to what we ought to read but to items in a
                  list, i.e., a sequence, whether flat or hierarchical. That canonical
               list allows readers to point to items with precision, clarity, confidence, and
               convenience. These familiar and indispensable numbering schemes have become the basis
               for structuring the texts in digital corpora such as the Thesarus Linguae Graecae
               (TLG, an extensive database of ancient Greek literature) and the CLCLT/Cetedoc
               Library of Latin Texts (a similar database for Latin). 
            Despite their convenience, canonical numbers are not always simple. Many ancient and
               medieval works have attracted more than one system, each based on incommensurate
               logic. A reference to Arist., Cat. 5.2 (2a14–15) is
               commonly, and without contention, understood to refer doubly to a single passage in
               Aristotle's Categories. The first pair of numbers points
               to the medieval-inspired chapter 5, subchapter 2; the latter pair, to the modern
               milestones of the highly influential 1831 Bekker edition: page 2, first column, lines
               14 and 15. The Bekker labels do not necessarily require one to consult the original
               nineteenth-century version. Any edition or translation that includes his numbers
               (very many do) could be used to find this passage. Both citation systems are widely
               used and highly regarded, since each serves a different purpose. The medieval system
               elegantly captures passages, sententiae, and logical segments; the
               Bekker numbers pinpoint specific lines, phrases, or words. 
            Canonical numbering systems are also fertile. They can change with new versions or
               editions. So, for example, the Taktika compiled by Leo
               VI in the tenth century has different paragraph numeration in the three editions
               published in the nineteenth, twentieth, and twenty-first centuries, each shaped by
               the distinct perspective of the editor.See  for a concordance of chapter numbers assigned in the Patrologia
                  Graeca, Vári's edition, and that of Dennis. Some alternative numbering
               schemes take hold and become standard; others face resistance. In some cases
               resistance or support for a particular system stems from assumptions about the origin
               and structure of the text. A good example is the Psalter. The most widely used
               numbering looks to the Hebrew tradition, in which Psalm numbers were not added until
               the tenth century at the earliest (and even then, in a system different from the
               modern one: ). This numbering differs from that
               used in the oldest Greek translations, anachronistically but usefully called the
               Septuagint (LXX). Most of the Psalm numbers in the Hebrew and the LXX differ by one.
               Such differences might seem trivial today, but to many early Christians the number of
               a Psalm was a key to its interpretation. For example, Didymus the Blind (Commentary on the Psalms, 106.24-109.4) held that Psalm 50
               LXX (51 Hebrew) was to be understood as a revelation that the number fifty, wherever
               it was found in scripture, symbolized repentance. According to Jerome (Homilies on the Psalms 5), Psalm 14 LXX (15 Hebrew) was to
               be read in concert with Exodus 12:6 and the fourteen-day half-cycle of the moon. Such
               interpretive readings corroborated how Christians understood themselves and how they
               characterized those outside the Church. Apologists as early as Justin Martyr (fl. 2nd
               c.) accused the Jews of having altered or dropped parts of the Bible that were
               faithfully preserved by the LXX (e.g., Dial. Tryph.
                  71–73).Justin is also the earliest attested author to unambiguously and
                  clearly use numbers for cross-reference. Dial. Tryph.
                  73.1. Thus, the two systems sustain views about the ideal state of the
               Psalter, and the boundaries of individual Psalms (Hebrew 9 and 10 = LXX 9; Hebrew 147
               = LXX 146 and 147). To assign a number to a Psalm is to take part, even if
               unwittingly or unwillingly, in old Jewish-Christian debates about the priority of one
               text tradition over the other, and the authentic structure of the Psalter. 
            These are but a few of the difficulties found in the canonical numbering systems we
               have inherited. Many others could be adduced.Other examples: (1) Text
                  associated with some canonical numbers may be deprecated, leaving gaps in the
                  numbering system, e.g., roughly forty verses of the New Testament since the
                  edition of Stephanus.  (2) Some competing systems are
                  fused together in hybrid form, e.g., chapter numbers from later systems combined
                  with line numbers of earlier ones. .
                  (3) Some canonical numbers designate spans of text with vague or ambiguous
                  beginning and end points, e.g., a number of intercolumnar letter labels in the
                  Patrologia Graeca and Patrologia Latina. (4) Texts from fragmentary authors take
                  at least two sets of canonical numbers: the fragment numbers of critically edited
                  anthologies and the canonical numbering schemes used in the original texts that
                  quote them. The problems affect technical decisions made in a digital
               humanities project. Shall one canonical numbering system be preferred over the other?
               Which one, and why? What support should be provided for alternatives? Should any be
               deprecated? Should canonical numbering be abandoned altogether? 
            How such questions are answered by a project may not suit everyone, including some of
               the editors and researchers who need to create and study that project's data. The
               assumptions and expectations scholars bring to the data they write and use greatly
               shape the practical ways canonical numbers are deployed in electronic texts.
         

            Practical answers: TEI and Canonical Text Services
            As has already been mentioned, canonical numbers were devised to help readers and
               writers refer to and find segments of literary works independent of specific editions
               or versions. In a digital environment, we would want the same function, and more. We
               should be able to make cross-references that can be understood unambiguously not just
               by humans but by computers, so that algorithms can cull the selected text from
               assorted other electronic versions, perhaps even versions unknown to the creator, and
               with minimal human intervention.
            Furnishing an electronic text with machine-actionable canonical numbers is easy, at
               least on a project-by-project basis. The challenge is finding a shared, interoperable
               protocol. Such interoperability is in theory possible in Text Encoding Initiative
               (TEI) files, but documentation for @cRef, the lynchpin of the system, is
               relatively unspecific and tailored mainly to single-project use. The prime TEI
               example, that of Matthew 5:7, assumes conventions suited to a predetermined
               processing application . To my
               knowledge, no set of values for @cRef are shared across projects,
               despite the potential: @cref is bound to the datatype
                  data.text, which permits unique, machine-readable names that could be
               parsed independent of any resolving algorithm. For example, using Matthew 5:7, one
               could theoretically encode in a TEI file <ref
                  cRef="http://example.org/NT/Mt/c5/v7" /> and, following the principles
               of linked open data, set up that URL to resolve HTTP requests with various
               serializations of Matthew 5:7 (e.g., in JSON-LD or another RDF format suitable for
               semantic web applications).HTTP: hypertext transfer protocol. URL: uniform
                  resource locator. JSON-LD: JavaScript Object Notation for Linked Data. RDF:
                  resource description framework. 
            
            The approach of using URL names for @cRef values is attractive, because
               it theoretically provides a way to refer to portions of texts by their canonical
               numbers, independent of any single TEI project's resolving algorithm or naming
               convention. And it would open up the legacy of all historical literature to the world
               of linked open data. But a @cref-based approach would be difficult to
               implement. The owner of example.org would need to configure the server
               to handle requests correctly and maintain that server, an extra set of duties that
               many potential TEI editors would prefer to avoid.A SPARQL endpoint has been
                  valorized as an ideal implementation, but setting one up and maintaining it can
                  pose high costs, evident in a 2013 survey that showed that only 52% of a set of
                  public SPARQL endpoints were operating. See , which
                  offers other cautionary points. How should one specify which language or
               version to return? How would one define in a single URL a more complex range of text
               (e.g., Matthew 5:7-6:10a)? And what about permanence? What happens when the domain
               name changes ownership?
            These difficulties have been addressed by Canonical Text Services (CTS), part of a
               larger protocol that coordinates collections, indexes, texts, and extensions (hence
               the name of the larger project, CITE).Material in this section derives from a
                  combination of documentation at www.homermultitext.org and my own experience setting up a CTS server.
                  Over the course of 19-22 May 2013, I was a participant at a CTS workshop held at
                  Furman University, Greenville, South Carolina. Project directors D. Neel Smith and
                  Christopher Blackwell helped participants configure individual CTS servers on
                  portable hard drives. On my CTS server I prepared and deployed around twenty Greek
                  texts: the Greek Septuagint version of Genesis (Rahlfs edition) and numerous
                  eighth- to tenth-century Byzantine Greek saints lives. Prepared in advance as
                  TEI-compliant XML, the files were converted by the CTS server into RDF triples,
                  segmented according to canonical number, and stored in Jena Fuseki as the basis
                  for a SPARQL endpoint. HTTP requests routed through Apache fulfilled browser-based
                  requests for data from the endpoint triplestore. The protocol depends upon
               a URN scheme (discussed below) designed for canonical numbers, with the central goal
               of allowing those who deploy servers to resolve CTS URNs so as to return to a client
               a string that corresponds to a specified canonical reference. The basic principles
               that govern CTS URNs have been outlined by Neel Smith, who has convincingly responded
               to doubts about whether text is an ordered
                  hierarchy of content objects (OHCO) by arguing that the primary coin of
               the realm — citation numbers — demonstrably are such a hierarchy, and
               can and should be treated as such . He does not
               claim that canonical numbers are the only way to structure texts in hierarchy, nor
               does he presume to say exactly what a text is, the question that vexed earlier
               scholars . The end result is a system that works, one
               that reliably delivers text segments, because it focuses on one type of well-ordered
               hierarchical model. 
            CTS URNs, complex strings, form the heart of the protocol, and deserve detailed
               attention, since they rely upon a specific domain model of how texts are structured.
               Let us use an example, urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001:1.26, one way in
               CTS to refer to Homer, Iliad 1.26. The URN has five
               major components.My description differs slightly from the latest official
                  specification, 2.0.rc.1, accessed 2014-04-17 from http://www.homermultitext.org/hmt-docs/specifications/ctsurn/
               
            
            The first part, urn, declares that the text string is a Uniform Resource
               Name (URN). Defined in RFC 2141 and RFC 3986 (which defines Internationalized/Uniform
               Resource Identifiers [IRI/URI], the superset of URNs) URNs are administered by the
               Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA).RFC 2141: http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2141. RFC 3986: http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986. At this writing, the second
               part of the URN, cts, is not in the IANA registry of URN namespaces, and
               governance of the namespace cts remains unclear.See http://www.iana.org/assignments/urn-namespaces/urn-namespaces.xhtml.
                  Like the administration of internet domain names (maintained by IANA's mother
                  organization, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers [ICANN]),
                  all IANA-approved URN schemes must define a mechanism for uniqueness and
                  persistence. That persistence is to be guaranteed either with or without an
                  actively administered registry. In the case of registry-dependent URNs, e.g.,
                  ISBNs and ISSNs, a namespace is granted to an international organization or
                  coalition of organizations capable of delegating numbers, of maintaining the
                  registry, and of safeguarding the uniqueness and stability of namespace-specific
                  strings. (The ideal does not always hold. It is well-known among librarians that
                  ISBNs cannot always be trusted, as some publishers have been known to recycle them
                  or poach on those belonging to other publishers.) Registry-independent URNs, e.g.,
                  UUIDs and tag URNs, must be defined precisely such that validly constructed
                  strings are guaranteed to be unique and persistent. Homer MultiText, the chief
                  user of CTS, claims A CTS-URN...is
                        unique and immutable
                  " (emphasis in the original) . And  suggests the beginnings of a central
                  registry, but there are still few details on governance and how persistence and
                  uniqueness will be guaranteed.
            
            The third element in the URN, greekLit, designates the first part of the
               namespace-specific string (NSS), a part that CTS documentation has called a
                  naming authority and a namespace, but which I will here
               call a subnamespace, mainly to distinguish it from the RFC 2141 use of
                  namespace. For URNs that rely upon a registry, the
               namespace-governing body assigns subnamespaces to participating individuals or
               organizations and delegates to them the responsibility for assigning unique strings
               that follow the subnamespace. Publishers, for example, buy a block of ISBNs from
               their national ISBN registration agency and unilaterally assign each publication a
               single number. But a CTS subnamespace, at least for now, is an arbitrary string,
               perhaps coined by an individual or organization that deploys a service that is meant
               to be CTS URN-compliant .See previous note.
            
            The fourth part, tlg0012.tlg001, identifies the work, so is called the
                  work component. The string follows an internal structure analogous to the hierarchy of the
                  Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Recordsr (FRBR).
                (The role and import of FRBR is discussed at
               length below.) It can take up to four segments, delimited by full stops. In our
               example, which has only two segments, the first, tlg0012, designates a
               text group (writings attributed to Homer) and tlg001 identifies the work
               (the Iliad).CTS treats the first segment, called
                     collection or text group as being outside the purview
                  of FRBR; the second segment, work, however, is said to be equivalent
                  to the FRBR definition. 
                Classicists will instantly (and correctly) associate tlg with
               the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae. But this association can be misleading, since one
               might assume that CTS URNs are wedded to the TLG cataloguing system. That would be a
               problem because TLG number assignments do not follow a FRBR-like principle, and would
               be inadequate for describing in a FRBR-compliant manner many ancient Greek texts .The two-part, seven-digit (xxxx.yyy) TLG
                  numbers are structured upon principles of practicality, not a consistent domain or
                  data model. The goal of the TLG has been to put all of ancient Greek literature
                  into a convenient, simple numbering scheme. Some inconsistency has been allowed in
                  the taxonomy to minimize confusion and duplication. The end result is a useful key
                  for text retrieval but not a FRBR-like model, which the architects of TLG never
                  intended to provide. In fact, TLG violates key FRBR principles. A full TLG number
                  might point not to a work (as defined in FRBR) but to an expression, a
                  manifestation, or an item, sometimes many of them at once (see any TLG number
                  assigned the title fragmenta, which collect assorted texts from
                  known but otherwise lost works). A work or an expression could have multiple TLG
                  numbers (see, e.g., Irenaeus, author 1447). Some TLG numbers refer to texts that,
                  according to FRBR's definitions might be preferably treated as works of other
                  languages (e.g., the books of the Septuagint). Comparable communities using Greek
                  texts that overlap with TLG's catalog may classify ancient or medieval Greek works
                  in a way incommensurate to TLG numbers. See, for example, the Dumbarton Oaks
                  Hagiography Database (http://www.doaks.org/research/byzantine/resources/hagiography-database),
                  e.g., the Life of Theophanes the Confessor (which
                  corresponds only roughly to TLG 3153); Euodius's version of the 42 Martyrs of Amorion (largely based on TLG 3083.007 but
                  incorporating readings from TLG 5098.003); and about nineteen lives that are
                  culled from individual works collected in an edition classified singly under TLG
                  4411. None of the observations in this note should taken as a criticism of the
                  TLG. I mean only to show that it is impossible to rely on a registry system such
                  as TLG if one needs to follow a consistent domain model of texts.  But in
               practice the construction of this fourth part of the URN is completely dependent upon
               the subnamespace owner, and so resultant strings are arbitrary. The subnamespace
               owner might have coined Homer.Iliad or Ao7G34.p24b with the
               same results, except that each has a different level of predictability and
               readability. The work identifier may take up to four segments. It could be simple
               (e.g., Iliad) or it could be extended to include a version segment,
               which may then be followed by an exemplar segment. Both segments are also arbitrary
                  strings.The third segment, called version, corresponds to
                  FRBR's term expression; the fourth segment, exemplar,
                  corresponds to item in FRBR. FRBR's term manifestation
                  has no correlate in the CTS URN scheme. For example,
                  tlg0012.tlg001.grc01.msA could be used to identify a particular
               version of the Iliad preserved in Greek in manuscript Venetus A. 
            The fifth part of the CTS-URN, called the passage component, specifies a
               node of text through canonical numbers. In our example, 1.26 designates
               book 1, line 26. A range of text may be indicated by two canonical numbers separated
               by a hyphen, e.g., 1.26-1.28. The URN may be extended to refer to
               textual units even more refined by appending an at sign and a string and an
               optional sequence identifier. For example, @ἐγὼ[1], may be appended to
               indicate the fifth word of Iliad 1.26 . Although this fifth element is theoretically
               just as arbitrary as the rest of the URN, in practice it is meant to be the least,
               because it trusts that people will want to use familiar canonical numbering schemes,
               simplified to ASCII letters and the Arabic numerals 0 through 9 (i.e., Roman numerals
               or Greek alphabetic numerals must be converted ahead of time).By definition
                  (RFC 2141) all URNs are restricted to the twenty-six Latin letters (upper
                  U+0041..005A and lower U+0061..007B, which cannot be treated as equivalent) plus
                  the numerals and nineteen punctuation signs (some of which are reserved). It is
                  unclear what provision will be made for canonical numbering conventions that
                  extend outside the basic Latin alphabet or require decisions on whether uppercase
                  or lowercase Latin letters should be used. For example, Frankenberg's edition of
                  the Syriac translation of works by Evagrius of Pontus introduces canonical numbers
                  that use a manuscript-based double-Greek letter system, e.g., fol.
                     2bα to refer to the part in his edition that corresponds to folio 2,
                  verso, 1st column of the manuscript he used. Of course this can be converted to a
                  CTS URN scheme, but neither an editor nor a researcher will be able to predict
                  whether such a number should be rendered 2b1, 2ba,
                     2bA, 2B1, 2Ba, or 2BA.
                For a given work, this fifth part must follow only a single canonical
               numbering system. But, theoretically, that text could be encoded multiple times with
               different work identifiers, each instance using a different numbering system. CTS
               provides no mechanism to declare explicitly which canonical system is being used.
            CTS and CITE were developed to produce results, to create a reliable and predictable
               way to store and serve canonical texts. Early implementations suggest that CTS URNs
               are an important advance in facilitating technology-independent referencing. But the
               current version of the URN specification does not address important aspects of
               canonical references, distinguishable between theoretical concerns and practical
               ones. I momentarily suspend the first, to address practical issues. What principles
               should guide decisions in CTS implementation? CTS seems designed to be at least
               somewhat decentralized, without sacrificing interoperability. If one CTS project
               wishes to interact with another, how will designers anticipate the conventions
               adopted by those projects to resolve complexities in canonical numbering schemes? If
               two CTS subnamespace owners mint URNs that describe the same work and they
               legitimately disagree about which numbering scheme to adopt, because each serves a
               different purpose, how can those differences be resolved? How would a translation of
               Aristotle in Arabic be divided by Bekker numbers, since a strict implementation would
               require overlapping and interlocked spans of text, i.e., a departure from a
               hierarchical model? What about a version of a work that is so disjoint with another
               that the received canonical numbering system is inadequate? How would one go about
               implementing a new one? Such practical questions are best approached by first
               considering how canonical numbers enter the process of textual scholarship.
         

            Canonical numbering and the process of textual scholarship
            Numbering parts of texts has traditionally been just one scholarly activity among
               many. Different texts demand different tasks, all of which can be placed somewhere on
               the following unidirectional sequence, consciously generalized here for the sake of
                  argument.Digital Research Infrastructure for the Arts and Humanities
                  (DARIAH), Bamboo DiRT, and other partnering organizations are pursuing a thorough
                  study of scholarly activity, which they plan to turn into an ontology (a
                  formalized description, in a given domain, of concepts and their
                  interrelationships) of digital research methods, suitable for the semantic
                  web.
            
            Before any activity at all, one must start with real, physical objects that bear
               written language: manuscripts, papyri, coins, seals, printed books, emails, etc. (I
               take digital files here to be material objects). Many of these are copies, of course,
               and scholars frequently hypothesize exemplars and archetypes. But even this
               hypothetical exercise, this urge to get to older but lost versions or to flesh out
               texts that are thought not to survive (e.g., Aristotle's treatise on comedy), must
               begin with the relevant writings that do survive. Our abstract
               constructions are always tethered to material artefacts.
            From the basis of existing artefacts, text-critical work engages primarily with the
               oldest text-bearing objects, be they ancient unica, modern books, digital images of
               artefacts that no longer survive, or what have you. Scholars, inspecting and reading
               the objects themselves (e.g., books, codexes, seals, coins), under various
               conditions, engage directly with them, an experience mediated through vision,
               apparatus (e.g., magnifying glasses, computer screens), and mental processes. I
                  do not champion here any particular epistemology or view of representation, since
                  I think any reasonable theory of how we perceive and know can be harmonized with
                  my description of scholarly activity.
            
            The work may then turn to creating surrogates of that original object, surrogates
               that replicate, describe, or interpret the visual features of the objects. Some
               surrogates are mechanically generated, e.g., printed photos, lithographs, squeezes,
               or digital images (2-D or 3-D scans or photographs), captured at various times, by
               various means, and under various conditions (e.g., of light). Other surrogates are
               derivative human artefacts created through a synthesis of judgment, interpretation,
               and skill, but intended to imitate the original object: line drawings, sketches, and
               other graphic-oriented interpretations (e.g., restored sketches of material too
               difficult to see in photographs). In every case, these surrogates are created to
               facilitate careful study and discussion of the original objects or the writing they
               carry, whether as an adjunct (e.g., an ultraviolet photograph of a papyrus fragment,
               to supplement other images) or as a replacement (e.g., a good, clean photocopy of a
               book, which requires the scholar to consult the prototype only when the photocopy is
               illegible). 
            Textual work then steps from graphically centered activity into transcription.
               Transcriptions fall along a continuum, with fidelity to the display of text on one
               side and concern for meaning on the other. On the first side are those transcriptions
               that frequently serve diplomatic editions. They respect graphic elements of the
               writing on the object or its surrogates, e.g., ligatures, punctuation, word space,
               line breaks, or letter position. On the other side are normalized transcriptions,
               where graphical features are resolved or converted. Ligatures might be broken into
               constituent letters, abbreviations spelled out, letterforms standardized, formats
               homogenized, or new punctuation and word space introduced. Visual cues on the object
               (size or color of letters, spacing) may nudge a transcriber to adopt a rudimentary
               form of semantic interpretation. Every diplomatic transcription requires at least
               some amount of normalization. And each normalized transcription follows a set of
               conventions, some used subconsciously, that adhere to readers' expectations for
               clarity and meaning. An object (or its surrogates) might undergo multiple
               transcriptions, but each one can be placed somewhere on this spectrum of graphic to
               semantic, diplomatic to normalized. 
            Letter or number labels may be applied to texts at any stage. They tend to come later
               rather than sooner. Numbers are rarely applied to the original object, the numbers
               written by a modern curator in the corners of a manuscript's folios being a rare
               example. On surrogates such as digital images or line drawings, line or object
               numbers might be superimposed. And in transcriptions, numbering is all but
               inevitable. The further along the process, the more likely a scholar is to label and
               number the lines, columns, pages, paragraphs, gaps, or other visible textual units.
               This numbering nudges a transcription, even if very slightly, toward the normalizing
               side of the spectrum, since the editor makes judgments about the boundaries and
               contours of the writing. 
            That accounts for textual study of individual objects. Work may then turn to groups
               and collections of objects recognized as carrying similar or identical texts. Where
               sufficiently similar, transcriptions are collated, and aligned and compared where
               they are not. Well-collated transcriptions become the foundation for critical
               editions. And upon these transcriptions, collations, and editions, a whole series of
               other activities depend: translation, annotation, commentary, analysis, and
               interpretation (scholarly or not). This class of work normally addresses questions
               that go beyond the visual features of individual text-bearing objects. What is the
               plot? Does this sentence exhibit sarcasm? What significance does this claim have on
               assessing the price of whale oil in the nineteenth century? Such activities
               necessarily come at the end of a complex trajectory of textual scholarship. Our work
               is rooted in the visual, graphic experience of text-bearing objects, and, without
               ever abandoning those foundations, presses out to the semantic, conceptual, and ideal
               realm. 
            My description is, of course, a broad generalization. For any given text, steps could
               be omitted, repeated, or worked on concurrently. Scholars regularly step back and
               oscillate between reflecting on ideas and scrutinizing objects. And anything created
               within this process could itself become the starting point for a chain of scholarship
               to begin anew. My argument depends not upon specific paths taken but upon the overall
               thrust, which is better or poorly served at each stage by the two basic types of
               canonical numbering. Every canonical numbering scheme of a text serves one end of
               this process better than the other. Attending to the physical object, we number or
               label folios, pages, columns, sides, anonymous blocks, lines, glyphs, strokes, or
               Cartesian coordinates. On the semantic side, we label logical or conceptual
               components: books, poems, stanzas, chapters, entries, speeches, sentences, clauses,
               words, letters. Thus, Bekker numbers in Aristotle are object-oriented (page, column,
               line numbers that correspond to the 1831 manifestation) but the medieval references
               are semantic-oriented (chapter, subchapter). Even when those systems are repurposed
               (e.g., Bekker numbers applied to paragraphs), one type of numbering is better suited
               to the text-bearing object, the other to a text's meaning and import. 
            All taxonomies and structures respond to and serve the purposes of questions and
               assumptions scholars bring to their research. Canonical numbering systems are such a
               structure. Therefore an object-based canonical numbering scheme is ideally suited to
               serve questions or purposes that are focused on the original text-bearing object (or
               its surrogates) that is the foundation of that system. Similarly, semantic sequences
               help one set aside the variety of physical objects that carry versions of a text so
               one can engage questions of meaning, significance, and importance. Object-based
               canonical numbers nicely accommodate the need to refer to texts with specificity.
               Semantic-based ones tend to support discussions about how works are internally
               structured. The two have different functions; neither is inherently superior. But
               they are each governed by two different domains — physical and conceptual — whose
               relationship complicates any reference system that intends to bridge the two worlds. 
            Our example CTS URN for the manuscript A of Iliad 1.26 —
                  urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.grc01.msA:1.26 — appeals to abstract
               entities everywhere except in the string msA. That a semantic numbering
               system (1.26) can connect to a physical object (msA) which
               can in turn be connected to three higher entities (the collection
                  tlg0012, the work tlg001, and the version
                  grc01) relies upon a particular view of texts, in this case a
               variation of a domain model called FRBR.
         

            Canonical numbering and textual entities (Functional Requirements for
               Bibliographic Records [FRBR])
            Just as scholarly activity can be described as a sequence, so textual entities, both
               physical and conceptual, can be — and have been — described in sequential or
               hierarchical models. The most thorough models are by those who most often write and
               share metadata about texts: librarians. The Functional Requirements for Bibliographic
               Records (FRBR), highly regarded and influential in library cataloguing worldwide, is
               one of the best known domain models to describe material books and their conceptual
                  archetypes.A much more complex extension of FRBR is FRBRoo ("oo" = object
                  oriented; http://www.cidoc-crm.org/),
                  which synthesizes FRBR with an ontology of cultural artefacts developed in the
                  museum world, CIDOC CRM. I focus here on FRBR because of its apparent conceptual
                  elegance and strength, and because CTS has used it as a point of departure.
               First published in 1997 by the International Federation of Library Associations and
               Institutions, FRBR has been designed to help librarians create better data models,
               calatoguing rules, and metadata records.Cataloguing rules: Resource Description
                  and Analysis (RDA), an international standard that replaces the Anglo-American
                  Cataloguing Rules (1978). http://www.rda-jsc.org. Data models: BIBFRAME, spearheaded by the
                  Library of Congress and inspired both by RDA and FRBR, is intended to replace MARC
                  21 records. Of the three groups stipulated by FRBR, only one, Group 1,
               which treats creative works, concerns us here. 
            FRBR describes Group 1 (creative artefacts) as a hierarchy of four entities,
               described top down as work, expression,
                  manifestation, and item (sometimes called
                  WEMI as a mnemonic). A work is a distinct intellectual or artistic creation but it
               is also an abstract entity
               . The Iliad, treated
               as a FRBR work, is to be found in no material object — it is an ideal, as is the
               second tier, expression, the
                  intellectual or artistic realization of a work.... [T]he specific intellectual or
                  artistic form that a work takes each time it is realized. Thus,
               Aristotle's Categories may be a work, but the lost Greek
               original, Andronicus's edition, Bekker's edition, and Bodéüs's translation would all
               be expressions of that single work. Works have a one-to-many relationship with
               expressions. Their metadata include descriptions of the creators, the subjects, dates
               of creation, and so forth.
            On the third tier is manifestation, the physical embodiment of an expression of a
                     work
               
               . This is the first level at which the physical
               embodiment of a creative work can be described. Expressions and manifestations share
               a many-to-many relationship. Just as any expression may be embodied by any number of
               manifestations (e.g., multiple print runs of a book), so any physical object might
               have multiple creative works (e.g., an anthology). Metadata about manifestations
               usually include descriptions about who made the physical artefact, when, where, and
               so forth. Thus, Bekker's edition, its later reprints, and arguably the digital scans
               housed by Google or Archive.org are individual manifestations. Any specific instance
               of a manifestation is described by the fourth and final tier, the item:
                  a single exemplar of a
                     manifestation
               
               . Examples of an item would be the copy of Bekker
               that sits on the shelf of my library, or the copy sold by a bookstore in New York.
               Manifestations and items form a pair, and like the corresponding upper pair (works
               and expressions), the first stands to the second in a one-to-many relationship.
            The hierarchy of WEMI follows the sequence of the creative process. A writer (or
               artist or musician — FRBR covers any creative work) mentally conceives of a
                  work, and decides to express it in a certain way. When
               the mental work becomes physical, that is, when the printing press inks the paper,
               the work is made manifest, and through distribution the public
               encounters individual items of the work. Each of the four stages is a
               necessary condition of the others. 
            The FRBR model, shaped as it is by specific priorities, assumptions, and needs, has
               come under sharp criticism, especially by librarians, best seen in the 2012 special
               issue of Cataloging & Classification Quarterly (vol.
               50, nos. 5–7). One FRBR difficulty touches on canonical numbering systems, namely,
               how to interpret the definitions of the four Group 1 entities. For example, the
               lavishly illuminated manuscript the Book of Kells, as
               noted by Ian Fairclough, is not easily and unambiguously modeled in FRBR.Email
                  posts "The Book of Kells," FRBR listserv, 2003-09-29 and 2003-10-08.  If
               treated as simply another biblical manuscript, the Book of
                  Kells would be catalogued as the sole exemplar (item = manifestation) of
               the New Testament Gospels (the work) in Latin translation (the expression). And a
               digital project dependent upon this approach to FRBR would be inclined to use the New
               Testament's traditional canonical reference system. But if thought of as a creative
               work of art in its own right, the Book of Kells could be
               reasonably classified simultaneously as work, expression, manifestation, and item. To
               some this approach would be absurd; to others — especially those who need to
               catalogue photographic reprints of the Book of Kells as
               independent manifestations — it would be sensible. A digital project following this
               interpretation of FRBR would would be well suited to use principally folio numbers,
               columns, and cartesian coordinates.
            All other problems aside, FRBR's architecture has salient points of comparison with
               the process of textual scholarship (described above) that touch on canonical numbers.
               Some differences should be immediately evident. For example, textual work begins with
               a physical object and moves up; the FRBR model begins at the opposite end, and moves
                  down.This is not the only way to construe FRBR. Matthew Beacom has argued
                  that the WEMI model presupposes a kind of Platonism, and that following an
                  Aristotelian approach (his preference), turning
                     the model upside down — flipping WEMI to IMEW — will make the model easier to
                     understand and to apply. Email post FRIDAY, or,
                     turning the bibliographic entities hierarchy (WEMI) upside down?, FRBR
                  listserv, 2003-11-18,11:29. Under this approach to FRBR, one begins with written
                  artefacts and tries to extrapolate types and archetypes, much as literary scholars
                  do.  The two models describe two different kinds of activities, each with a
               distinct set of necessary conditions. FRBR focuses on the creative process that leads
               from the mind of the writer to the hands and eyes of the readers. An account of the
               workflow of textual scholars describes how they take a preexisting artefact and
               incorporate it into their own creative work. Consequently, a digital project that
               approaches its texts with the FRBR perspective is likely to start with semantic
               canonical numbering as a foundation upon which to superimpose any other visual ones.
               But a project that takes a viewpoint grounded in the sequence of textual work is
               likely to adopt visual numbers as a starting point. Once again, neither approach is
               inherently superior. But in any given project one should always be aware which type
               of system has been given primacy.
            A second obvious difference between editorial work and FRBR's model is in the
               latter's differentiation between manifestation and item.
               Scholars dealing with texts that survive primarily on premodern text-bearing objects
               will nearly always be dealing fundamentally with unica perhaps best thought of as
               item-manifestations. No manuscript or carving is identical to another, regardless of
               how closely a copy imitates its model. This distinction then is of little consequence
               to some canonical numbering systems, but of great importance to those that must
               include both manifestations and items as distinct categories, for example, projects
               that compare inscriptions on coins or seal impressions (among the few ancient
               artefacts that can be described in terms of manifestations) or that compare different
               print impressions of a book. Any canonical numbering convention that disallows
               manifestations or requires them runs the risk of excluding certain classes of
               texts.
            Some points of comparison between FRBR and scholarly practice are tempting to
               construe as differences, but those differences are only superficial. The most salient
               for canonical numbering pertains to what CTS calls text groups or collections, e.g.,
               the collected works of Homer. This class is treated as a conscious departure from
               FRBR . But that deviation may be more apparent
               than real since, in fact, FRBR allows works to encompass, and to be encompassed by,
               other works, so-called aggregating works. For example, the Bible, the New Testament,
               the Gospels, Matthew, and the Lord's Prayer can all be legitimately classified as
               FRBR works . FRBR 3.3: The structure of the model, however,
                     permits us to represent aggregate and component entities in the same way as we
                     would represent entities that are viewed as integral units. That is to say that
                     from a logical perspective the entity work, for example, may represent an
                     aggregate of individual works brought together by an editor or compiler in the
                     form of an anthology, a set of individual monographs brought together by a
                     publisher to form a series, or a collection of private papers organized by an
                     archive as a single fond. By the same token, the entity work may represent an
                     intellectually or artistically discrete component of a larger work, such as a
                     chapter of a report, a segment of a map, an article in a journal, etc. For the
                     purposes of the model, entities at the aggregate or component level operate in
                     the same way as entities at the integral unit level; they are defined in the
                     same terms, they share the same characteristics, and they are related to one
                     another in the same way as entities at the integral unit level. Further
                  work on aggregates is being conducted by an IFLA working group: http://www.ifla.org/node/923. For a
                  critical reflection see .  That
               complexity makes it impossible to introduce a FRBR Group 1 entity higher than work,
               even if it were desirable.To differentiate collection from
                     work in a domain model entails difficult questions, e.g., should
                  collections of collections motivate yet another ontological layer of
                     metacollections? The logic that compels one to avoid an infinite
                  regress is the same that motivated FRBR architects to stick simply with
                     work.  Deliberating over how works relate to collections,
               or works relate to works, importantly affects how one thinks about canonical
               numbering systems. Canonical references, as noted above, follow a hierarchical model,
               which can be represented as a tree. Each node in a hierarchical tree is the child of
               one node and no more, and it does not overlap with its sibling nodes. But a
               hierarchical model cannot fully describe works or collections. Any work may
               incorporate multiple works or collections or be incorporated by multiple works or
               collections, and sibling works frequently overlap. So the
               relationship of works to each other — singly or in groups — cannot be described in a
               tree hierarchy. One needs not a hierarchical model but a network one, to express sets
               and many-to-many relations. Thus, any protocol that is meant to deal with the
               relations that hold between textual parts and wholes cannot depend exclusively upon a
               hierarchical model, which will suit only canonical numbers of individual
               predetermined works. Alternatively, if a protocol chooses for practical reasons to
               adopt a hierarchical model not only for canonical references but for their
               superstructures, then the documentation for that protocol should explain how users
               should convert complex work-work or work-collection relations into a simpler
               hierarchical model.
            Now some similiarities between FRBR and editorial work habits, particularly those
               that touch on canonical numbering systems. One pertains to the distinction between
               conceptual and material realms. As might already be apparent, object-based numbering
               schemes (e.g., page numbers) correspond to the lower half of the FRBR model (item and
               manifestation); semantic-based ones, e.g., paragraphs, parallel the upper half
               (expression and work). The bottom half of FRBR Group 1 entities is comparatively
               straightforward, implemented by library cataloguers without a great deal of
               confusion. This corresponds to the relatively clear and unambiguous use of
               object-based canonical numbering systems. An editor needs merely to number the pages
               and lines of any transcription, which is rather uncontroversial to do if the writing
               is clear. A reference to the smallest unit in an object-based numbering system, e.g.,
               folio 3v, left column, 7th line, 5th glyph, can be written, read, and cited with
               little potential for confusion — low entropy as it were. 
            But the upper half is oftentimes not well understood, and precision can be
               problematic . I have already pointed out how FRBR has
               not attempted to formalize a mechanism to describe how one work relates to another.
               To that should be added the uncertainty about the boundary line between expression
               and work. By FRBR definition, translations are individual expressions of a single
               work. But clearly some translations or adaptations take a life of their own,
               generating other translations or becoming independently culturally significant (e.g.,
               Plautus's plays, or free adaptations of Shakespeare). The transition point, where an
               expression might be legitimately described as a work in its own, is noted but not
               defined by the FRBR model .
               The discernment a cataloguer must exercise to distinguish a work from an expression
               resembles the judicious choices a textual scholar makes in devising a semantically
               oriented system of canonical numbers. To divide a text and attach numbers to
               sentences and paragraphs requires interpretive discernment of a sort quite different
               than the one that labels lines and pages of an object. Segmentation of the former
               kind relies upon the contestable interpretation of the boundaries of meaning, much
               like the work-expression and work-work boundaries that must be determined by library
               cataloguers. Some libraries might disagree with how the Library of Congress
               classifies a work, and they would be within their rights to catalogue it as they see
               fit, especially if the decision is in service of the libraries' specialized missions.
               So too in textual scholarship. If the modern editor of a previously edited text
               faults the interpretation that motivated the received semantically oriented canonical
               numbering system, and if the editor cannot adapt it without doing violence to the
               interpretation of the text, then that editor is entirely justified in renumbering. Of
               course this runs the risk of introducing confusion. But it is up to the editor to
               think critically about how a work should be interpreted and to determine whether the
               risk is justified. And it is up to readers and other editors to decide whether or not
               the new system deserves acceptance. Our reasonable desire for a uniform convention
               should not always prevail. All semantic canonical numbering schemes are
               interpretations, and all interpretations merit critical reflection and revision. 
         

            Recommendations for using canonical numbers in digital projects
            Historically, refinements in canonical citation have capitalized on technological
               innovation. Chapter numbers in prose came with the codex and served the Church.
               Subchapter and verse numbers came with the book industry and served both the Church
               and the academy. We now have the opportunity to refine to an unprecedented level our
               existing cross-reference systems, and to introduce varieties of new ones, to serve a
               much wider swathe of society. Architects of digital projects should do all they can
               to support that trend, not curtail it.
            Anyone designing and populating digital projects should keep in mind the two types of
               canonical numbering systems, and make decisions accordingly. This is not to say that
               the two types cannot or should not be combined (e.g., Bekker numbers to identify
               paragraphs in Aristotle's Categories). There may be situations where a
               mixture would be appropriate. But project architects should be on the lookout for
               cases where a fusion of the two might entail confusion or invalid data.
            New or enriched numbering systems should be encouraged, not discouraged. New systems
               should be coordinated with predecessors. Provision should be made, when possible, for
               tables that allow one canonical numbering system to be converted to another. This
               would permit scholars not only to structure and therefore interpret their corpora in
               new ways, but to look afresh at texts through obsolescent numbering schemes that may
               be objects of study in their own right. Consider, for example, an edition of a
               classical text coded to be read not only in its modern segmentation but in an earlier
               one, so that a scholar specializing in sixteenth-century culture might study how the
               classical legacy was then being interpreted.
            Numbering systems should be maximally human readable without sacrificing machine
               parsability, and they should be useful independent of any specific project or
               algorithm. Although not every project will find CTS URNs suitable, their model should
               be studied. For example, the use of the token specifier #ἐγὼ[1]
               discussed above may make no sense for a particular project that wishes to specify a
               fragment independent of a particular language. But the CTS convention demonstrates an
               important way to attain new levels of specificity in our canonical numbers. Along
               these lines I have argued that object-based numbering schemes offer more precision
               than semantic-based ones do, because the former are not as likely to be confused or
               contested. But that is not to say that granularity in semantic numbering systems are
               impossible; rather, specificity in each of the two types requires different
               strategies.
            For object-based numbering systems, there is enormous potential for clear,
               unambiguous, and precise (or precisely fuzzy) cross-referencing. With existing
               technology one can point not just to pages and lines but to shapes, blotches, white
               space, or any spatial region. Thus, project managers do well to accommodate
               descriptions of specific rectangular regions of an image. They do better to support
               polygonal regions. Even better are scalable vector graphics, which can identify the
               most erratically shaped regions in a flat digital image.The Open Annotation
                  model offers an example of how to leverage SVG for a referential system. http://www.openannotation.org
                Although there are challenges in coordinating and synchronizing the
               description of a single region across multiple digital surrogates of the same object,
               that difficulty is best addressed not in the numbering scheme but in how the
               surrogates are coordinated. Scholars who are editing and labeling texts should not
               have to negotiate that answer.
            Semantic numbering schemes also have enormous potential for specificity. In theory,
               we could label not just paragraphs and sentences, but semantic units as small as
               words, letters, and accents. For example, one could coin Arist., Cat. 5.2.9.2 to refer to the 9th word, 2nd letter of Aristotle's 
                  Categories
               , chapter 5 subchapter 2, i.e., the ρ in the word πρώτως (firstly). But editors and linguists may
               legitimately differ on how to define semantic units, and even then on how to
               interpret those definitions. At what point does a paragraph or sentence begin and
               end? What is a word? Does a contraction count as one or two? Should a ligature be
               counted as one or two letters? Should combining characters (U+0360..036F) be counted
               individually or not? How should punctuation factor in any word or character counts?
                  ,  The problem is twofold, because such commitments
               must be made both by those who create transcriptions and by those who use them. If
               people working on the same transcription are in disagreement or confusion about the
               interpretation of a new numbering system, then it cannot be reliably shared. But I
               believe the challenge merits consideration, not despair. If the assumptions and
               definitions that underlie incommensurate semantic numbering schemes could be
               unambiguously declared, then it should be straightforward to develop concordance
               tables, much like the ones proposed above for larger semantic units. The main
               challenge is to find ways to allow those who are preparing a transcription the means
               to declare, in a machine-readable way, what normalization techniques they have
               imposed upon a text. And those who wish to use transcriptions should be provided a
               similar mechanism, to declare how they have defined and interpreted semantic units
               such as sentences, words, and characters. Both mechanisms — one for editors and one
               for researchers, interdependent — would be enormously useful. At the same time, if it
               can be demonstrated that certain kinds of declarations are limited, difficult,
               impossible to make, or impossible to coordinate with other declarations, then the
               philosophical implications for linguistics, computing, and logic would be
               significant, making the effort all the more worthwhile.
            Almost every text lends itself to numerous types of milestones that could be used for
               canonical numbering systems. Beyond the simple, straightforward examples of Bible
               chapters and verses, the systems can get quite complex and can be prone to ambiguity.
               To mitigate confusion on the part of both humans and computers, digital projects
               should require canonical numbers to be typed, or they should be clear about what
               default typology has been assumed, so each number or letter clearly corresponds to a
               particular unit. For example, an encoding of Arist., Cat. 5.2 (2a14–15), which cites five different measures, should specify
               which label corresponds to what kind of unit. I defer for now a discussion of how to
               do this effectively.I am in the process developing a possible approach, as part
                  of an XML encoding format for text alignment.
            
            Project managers may need to discourage the use of some numbering systems. For
               example, a project aligning a text and its translations would be ill-advised to use
               an object-based numbering system such as Bekker numbers. Such a project, focused as
               it is upon coordinating semantic units (words and phrases) across versions will have
               to deal with segmentation challenges both in the source text and in the translated
               text. For example, the πρώτως discussed above breaks midword and so
               spans two Bekker line numbers. And translations of the Categories will
               rarely respect the boundaries of Bekker line numbers. Fine-tuned bitext aligment
               based on visually based numbering systems would be difficult if not impossible. 
            On the other hand, some digital projects might best serve their editors and their
               researchers by supporting only object-oriented numbering schemes. For
               example, a project focusing on documentary editions or a project that focuses upon
               coordinating diplomatic transcriptions with their digital surrogates might prevent
               considerable confusion by compelling users and editors to work only with visual
               landmarks.
            Or maybe not. It all depends upon the needs and expectations of project stakeholders.
               Managers should temper flexibility with realism, prioritizing support for canonical
               numbering systems in accord with the project's budget, staff, schedule, and goals. It
               is rarely easy to get resources to match our ambitions. But I hope my suggestions and
               reflections on the rationale and best practices for canonical number systems are
               helpful to those who are trying to calibrate that match. 
         

            Acknowledgements
            For reading drafts of this article or for offering their constructive comments on
               random ideas I thank Ian Fairclough, Andrew Sulavik, John Hostage, Martin Wallraff,
               Karen Coyle, Matthew Beacom, and Dot Porter. If while describing phenomena in their
               fields of specialty I have erred, I alone am to blame.
         
