Title:  Laptop Policy: Notes on Boredom
Volume:  012
Issue:  2
Date:  12 September 2018
Abstract:  
                
                 In this essay, I examine the use of laptops in the classroom
                    through the lens of boredom. Now that we can carry around an incredibly powerful
                    little computer in our pockets or bring a lightweight laptop to class, boredom
                    is a feeling that we almost never have to face anymore. We instantly alleviate
                    the slightest hint of impatience or aimlessness with a single glance at our
                    screens. But what introspective capacities do we neglect when we reflexively
                    give ourselves over to the distractions of the outside world? What might
                    dwelling within our boredom open up to students? Using my undergraduate
                    Introduction to Digital Media course as a case study, I argue that a humanistic
                    approach to digital media provides STEM students in particular with a means of
                    contextualizing technical detail within larger sociopolitical systems, and that
                    a focus on individual habits of attention can provide an important hinge between
                    the granular and the global. Next, I reflect on the pressures produced by the
                    very devices we studied on the classroom environment, and frame our experiences
                    within some of the most influential writings on boredom as a historically and
                    technologically conditioned mood. I then conclude with some speculations on
                    planning for boredom within a laptop policy that is capable of accounting for a
                    range of learning styles. 
            
Full Body Text: 
Introduction
It wasn't until I taught an Introduction to Digital Media course that, ironically, I
                began questioning my policy on laptops in the classroom. Since my first experience
                as a teaching assistant in graduate school, I've allowed and even embraced them.
                During the inevitable conversation on laptops among colleagues, I was always the
                person arguing that students use these machines to write, read, and think for the
                vast majority of their academic activities. To exclude laptops from the classroom, a
                space in which students learn how to write, read, and think, would be
                disingenuous. Given my training in media theory and digital humanities, terms like
                    distraction and attention in this context evoked a faintly naive
                technological determinism, as if the cognitive abilities of our students could be
                single-handedly warped by machines. Even the most influential quantitative studies —
                such as The Laptop and the Lecture
                 or The Pen is Mightier than the
                    Keyboard
                 — left me unconvinced, largely because they assumed an
                analytic framework absent historical background, medium specificity, and cultural
                context, in which the presence of the laptop in a single Ivy League lecture
                course is made to speak for all possible learning situations. Historians and
                theorists of media technologies have provided depth and nuance to figurations like
                these for decades.
While I maintain my skepticism of broad generalizations about the laptop as a unitary
                technology and the student as a fixed cognitive quantity, the experience of
                teaching a course that took digital media as both its object and method of inquiry
                forced me to rethink my assumptions about the presence of laptops and other screens
                in class. Much of our energy was devoted to figuring out how we might embrace the
                laptops glowing before us at the same time as we explored the history, culture, and
                politics of the information coursing through them. And yet we still experienced the
                inevitable draining of our attention, the sense that the laptop was becoming
                something more than simply a handy object lesson for our topic of discussion. Of
                course, attention, energies, and enthusiasms wax and wane with any semester. As we
                approach summer, laptops seem to follow an ecliptic plane as they gradually move
                from the polite position off to one side (as recommended in the syllabus section on
                screen etiquette) to the rather less polite one directly in front of us. And with
                them come the glazed-over eyes, the suspiciously busy keystrokes, the stifled grins
                apropos of nothing that anyone else can see. But where I would normally write off
                this change as simply part of the academic year's circadian rhythms, something about
                this course made me think a little differently about it.
Digital media, our object of study, had gone from being a means of reflexive pedagogy
                to a noticeable drain on the flow of the course. In previous years, I had wonderful
                results using laptops for exercises in textual analysis and collaborative
                annotation, as well as the occasional fact check or live event look-in. The events
                of this particular semester, however, led me to wonder: at what point does our
                attention to digital media shift from an attitude of analysis to one of distraction?
                After all, distraction is a specific form of attention to something. As Paul North
                writes, 
                    Distraction is diversion, and
                        diversion is a version of attention
                    
                . But distraction is a version of attention that is no longer directed by
                volition, discipline, or desire. When we are distracted by something, we feel the
                direction of our conscious minds pulled by something outside of ourselves. In taking
                digital media as an object and means of study, what then marks the transition from
                attention guided by disciplinary frameworks and measured contemplation to attention
                dispersed and unsynchronized, diluted by the sheer depth and variety of interesting
                things to give our attentions to?
The natural fear on my part as an educator was that this gradual shift was the
                product of boredom. I thought back to my previous classes and initial instincts
                about allowing laptops in the classroom. Of course, I can justify the decision based
                on my theoretical commitments as a scholar of digital media. But what if I was
                simply afraid of ever risking the presence of classroom boredom in the first place?
                What if allowing laptops and their periodic distractions was just a means of taking
                a measure of pressure off myself, someone who not only has an obligation to keep
                students fully engaged and present, but also feels often like a performer in front
                of all those eyes?
In this essay, I examine boredom from two angles: as a mood currently undergoing
                uniquely historical transformations, and as a potentially useful pedagogical
                technique. When someone becomes bored, their natural response is to find an object,
                idea, or activity to latch on to, a distraction to pass the time. We distract
                ourselves from the discomfort of boredom. Now that we can carry around an incredibly
                powerful little computer in our pockets or bring a lightweight laptop to class,
                boredom is a feeling that we almost never have to face anymore. We instantly
                alleviate the slightest hint of impatience or aimlessness with a single glance at
                our screens. Teaching an Introduction to Digital Media left me wondering what would
                happen if, rather than tolerating or even embracing the distraction that laptops can
                bring to the classroom, I simply let myself let my students feel bored. Boredom
                today is like a disease on the verge of eradication that we would be woefully
                unprepared to deal with were it ever to return. But what introspective capacities do
                we neglect when we reflexively give ourselves over to the distractions of the
                outside world? What might dwelling with our boredom open up to students?
I begin with the example of my digital media course, which attracted majors from
                across the disciplines, including a majority contingent of computer science
                students. In order to bridge the many different forms of expertise and associations
                surrounding digital media that were brought to the table, we drew on a conversation
                format used at the historic Macy conferences on cybernetics. In their final project,
                students were encouraged to examine their daily habits as users of digital devices.
                Drawing on these experiences, I describe how a humanistic approach to digital media
                provides STEM students in particular with a means of contextualizing technical
                detail within larger sociopolitical systems, and how a focus on individual habits of
                attention can provide an important hinge between the granular and the global. Next,
                I reflect on the pressures produced by the very devices we studied on the classroom
                environment and frame our experiences within some of the most influential writings
                on boredom as a historically and technologically conditioned mood. I then conclude
                with some speculations on planning for boredom within a laptop policy that is
                capable of accounting for a range of learning styles.

                Disciplinary Attention
                Over the past decade, the increasing presence of digital media has made strange
                    the very fabric of our conversations, movements, aesthetic experiences, and
                    political consciousness. These changes were prepared for by information
                    theorists in the 1940s, cyberneticians in the 1950s, and the architects of
                    networked computation in the 1960s. But only now have we begun to live out the
                    futures that were dreamed of by these technologists. Today with our digital
                    devices, we experience their dreams as beliefs, daily routines, and
                    compulsions.
                Intro to Digital Media was a class that began by examining the historical roots
                    of information as both a technology and a concept. We then proceeded down a
                        stack of topics in digital culture: code, interface,
                    device, infrastructure, and power. Each of these topics was explored through a
                    comparative framework, using hands-on exercises and readings from across the
                    disciplines, including the philosophy of computation, history of technology,
                    cultural studies, literary criticism, science fiction, and media theory.
                    Students were encouraged to think historically (how have media been experienced
                    as new at different moments in time?), theoretically (how
                    exactly do we address medium as an object of study), and tactically (how
                    can we use our local experience of digital devices as a framework for thinking
                    global networks?). Throughout the semester, in-class exercises linked the theory
                    we encountered in our readings to everyday practice, including a data detox designed
                    by the Tactical Technology Collective, FemTechNet's collection of resources for
                            Locking Down Your Digital Identity, and encryption for
                    messaging and data transfer using Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) with Keybase.
                The exact direction our conversations took was determined by the makeup of the
                    class: roughly half of the students who registered were computer science majors,
                    with the remainder coming from various humanities programs. This made for an
                    interesting experiment in cross-disciplinary communication at the undergraduate
                    level that, for me, opened up questions about the specific kind of expertise
                    that a humanities education offers. What practices should we model in the
                    context of classes on digital media, especially when many students already enter
                    with a high degree of technical literacy? What values can a humanities education
                    impart for the kinds of careers that STEM students will be entering into? My
                    students had acquired very different forms of expertise over their respective
                    programs of university study. And so making our ideas clear didn't just entail
                    clarifying the individual frameworks we used when thinking about technology, but
                    also our various styles of attention toward technology as an object of study.
                    Our disciplines are, after all, specific forms of attention, as Paul North
                    argues. A discipline is 
                        a Wissenschaft, a methodical, repeated relation to
                            sanctioned objects, an institutionalized attention
                        
                    .
                One of our inspirations in speaking from individualized sets of experience and
                    expertise was the conversation format for the famous 1950s Macy Conferences on
                    cybernetics. These conferences featured presentations from engineers,
                    biologists, social scientists and humanists all interested in new theories of
                    communication, the boundaries between human and machine, and the question as to
                    whether the operation of new computers could help us understand the inner
                    workings of the brain. The proceedings read like a who's who of mid-century
                    intellectual history, with Norbert Wiener, Claude Shannon, Gregory Bateson,
                    Margaret Mead, and John Von Neumann all sharing often highly technical research
                    from the cutting edge of their respective disciplines. During each of the
                    two-day conferences, held once or twice a year from 1946-1953, participants were
                    given the opportunity to deliver a formal paper. But if at any time during that
                    presentation there were another participant who didn't understand a particular
                    term or concept, that person would interrupt the speaker and ask for
                    clarification. Either an explanation would be given and the presentation would
                    continue, or a larger conversation would emerge from that point of clarification
                    until it eventually arced back into the main presentation.
                This format was incredibly useful to us. Then, as now, the concept of the digital
                    required a great deal of explication, especially among people of such different
                    backgrounds. For example, during the seventh Macy Conference in March 1950, the
                    neuroscientist Ralph Gerard presented on Some Problems
                        Concerning Digital Notions of the Central Nervous System. When
                    posing the question of whether the electrical activity between the brain and the
                    nervous system should be understood as analog or digital signals, Gregory
                    Bateson interrupts Gerard and says, I
                        am a little disoriented by the opposition between analogical and
                        digital, wondering if all involved could tidy up our vocabulary. John Von Neumann, the
                    mathematician and pioneering figure in the history of computing, jumps in to
                    admit, It is very difficult to give
                        precise definitions . . . although it has been tried repeatedly. Present use
                        of the words analogical and digital in science is not
                        completely uniform. J.C.R. Licklider, a psychologist known for his
                    work on the perception of sound, complicates the situation further when he asks
                    what intuitive sense a non-specialist would make of these terms: To a lay man analogical and digital are
                        not opposites and any very clear sense. The conversation spins out,
                    until finally Licklider returns to the original subject of Gerard’s
                    presentation, adding, I am afraid we
                        have disturbed the course of things about this too much. . . . We will use
                        the words as best we can.
                Not only were these researchers hammering out a scientific consensus on emerging
                    models for the body and on new computing machines, but they also were debating
                    the specific words that should be used to communicate these concepts across
                    academic disciplines and to the public. It's as if they understood that public
                    discourse about these new technologies could determine their eventual future.
                    Then, as now, the distinctions we make between analog and digital, information
                    and data, are not hard and fixed. These aren't entities with necessary and
                    sufficient technical conditions. They are instead a matter of perception, of
                    ontologies, of culture. The refractory manner in which each of my students used
                    these terms in conversation reflects that diversity. But it also required
                    negotiating the various forms of disciplinary attention that each student
                    brought to digital media, whether they were inclined to understand them
                    primarily as aesthetic experiences or political realities, as legal entities or
                    financial propositions. Our terms often slipped out of alignment and that was
                    okay. The challenge was to make sure that all of the different forms of
                    attention these students had been trained in were synchronized rather than
                    working at cross purposes.
                For their final project, students were asked to direct these different forms of
                    disciplinary attention to a single digital device that was particularly resonant
                    in their daily lives. If we find ourselves ceaselessly distracted by the devices
                    we use to read and communicate every day, this project was an experiment in
                    rerouting those distractions through a deep material literacy regarding where
                    our devices come from and how they are made. Students selected a specific
                    digital device and traced the lifecycle of its manufacture, use, re-use, and
                    disposal. Doing so is a very big task. A single smartphone, for instance,
                    contains over two hundred chemical compounds, and the scale of its production is
                    truly global: from rare-earth metal mines in Baotou to data centers in Iowa,
                    from grey markets in Jakarta to electronics scrap yards in Delhi. But even
                    though smartphones allow their users to inhabit countless
                        social worlds simultaneously, the material world of the
                    smartphone itself remains invisible to its users.
                So, students were presented with many different methods for going about their
                    research, and there were many different pieces of the puzzle they could choose
                    to focus on. It was understood that no two final projects would look alike. The
                    project consisted of two components. First, students produced some form of
                    conceptual model of their artifact, using a map, icons, matrices, or 3D
                    modeling. Some decided to create supply chain maps of their artifact using Sourcemap, which allows anyone to
                    create a map annotated with text, images, and videos of the locations of a
                    device's material inputs, manufacturing, and shipping. Other students expressed
                    the composition of their artifact using symbol systems like Isotype (International
                    System Of Typographic Picture Education), created by Otto Neurath and Gerd Arntz
                    in the 1920s and 30s. Isotype — as well as similar symbol systems like the
                    Pictorial Communication Language (PICOL), The Noun
                        Project, and font awesome
                        icons — provided a means of schematizing the various components of
                    each device. Students then wrote reflective papers that situated their artifacts
                    within the historical and conceptual frameworks we explored in class.
                Some traced a single rare-earth element in order to understand the entirety of
                    their device, like the cobalt used in keyboards or the tantalum used in iPhones.
                    Others took an infrastructural approach, tracing the environmental impact of
                    streaming a single film on Netflix, or of running Wikipedia's data centers. A
                    few conducted comprehensive tear downs of popular gadgets like the Amazon Echo
                    or Fitbit activity trackers. Exploring the material specificities of their
                    devices gave students a means of better understanding what Bruce Sterling calls
                    the cognitive load of each
                    device: their capacity for attention and distraction . Much like scholars of book history who challenge their students to assemble
                    a codex from scratch to better appreciate the technology of the book, my aim was
                    to have students use this much more granular understanding of their devices’
                    construction in everyday practice.
            

                Boring Ourselves
                What I didn't anticipate in planning this course was the way that its subject
                    matter would inflect the format and flow of our work. Digital media ended up
                    being more than just our object of study. Its presence in the classroom put
                    pressure on our attempts to synchronize the different disciplinary frameworks
                    and kinds of attention that students had been familiarized with by their majors.
                    And so I began turning to theorists of older, early-twentieth-century media —
                    cinema and radio — for some of the most influential writing on the relationship
                    between attention, distraction, and boredom. If boredom was the impulse driving
                    us to check our screens, then maybe these writings could help us imagine the
                    ways that boredom might be redirected toward different pedagogical ends.
                An interval of pause in the mechanical rhythms that structure labor and leisure,
                    boredom has a history mirroring that of modernity . In the 1920s, Siegfried Kracauer identified boredom and distraction as moods
                    central to understanding an emerging white-collar or
                        salaried class in Weimar Germany. As the Berlin
                    correspondent for the Frankfurter Zeitung
                    feuilleton — Walter Benjamin celebrated Kracauer's appointment to the post by
                    writing, 
                        It is good for the city to have
                            its enemy within its walls
                        
                     — Kracauer described offices and spaces of entertainment as complex
                    expressions of this white collar culture. Urban audiences in Weimar Germany
                    flocked to massive cinema palaces designed by modern architects. Unlike earlier
                    forms of programming, in which multiple short films were shown together as part
                    of a single admission, cinema palaces featured one film as the culmination of a
                    revue containing dancers, special effects, and musicians entertaining the
                    audience before the film began. Kracauer described the experience of attending
                    these cinemas as the total artwork
                        of effects: 
                        Spotlights shower their beams
                            into the auditorium, sprinkling across festive drapes or rippling
                            through colorful, organic looking glass fixtures. The orchestra asserts
                            itself as an independent power, its acoustic production buttressed by
                            the responsory of the lighting. Every emotion is accorded its own
                            acoustic expression and its color value in the spectrum — a visual and
                            acoustic kaleidoscope that provides the setting for the physical
                            activity on stage: pantomime and ballet. Until finally the white surface
                            descends and the events of the three-dimensional stage blend
                            imperceptibly into two-dimensional illusions.
                        
                    
                Where others saw these films as trivial diversions, Kracauer sensed something
                    genuinely new in the diversity of their audience. Unlike the more
                    class-segregated populations of rural towns, four million Berliners meant by
                    sheer necessity that all kinds of people circulated through the same cinemas, 
                        a process that creates the
                                homogenous cosmopolitan audience in which everyone has
                            the same responses, from the bank director to the sales
                            clerk, from the diva to the stenographer
                        
                    . And while other cultural critics chided Berliners for their addiction to
                    these entertainments, Kracauer argued that the rhythm of cinema's distractions
                    corresponded to the intensity of modern industrial labor. One thinks of the
                    famous scene in Chaplin's Modern Times (1936) in
                    which the Tramp is ingested by the assembly line he finds impossible to keep
                    pace with. The repetitive drudgery of that labor is doubled by the audience's
                    response to its representation in the cinema, where 
                        The stimulations of the senses
                            succeed one another with such rapidity that there is no room left
                            between them for even the slightest contemplation
                        
                    . The forms of labor to which the audience was submitted outside the
                    cinema found a kind of catharsis in the collective emotional shocks produced by
                    film, like convulsive laughter or screams of surprise. Which meant for Kracauer
                    that distraction had become newly elevated 
                        to the level of culture
                        
                    .
                Cinematic distraction signified for Kracauer a unique political potential because
                    it was experienced across class divisions. Distraction allowed individual
                    spectators within the mass audience to perceive themselves as a collective
                    whole. In the cinema, 
                        the audience encounters itself;
                            its own reality is revealed in the fragmented sequence of splendid sense
                            impressions. Were this reality to remain hidden from the viewers, they
                            could neither attack nor change it; its disclosure in distraction is
                            therefore of moral significance
                        
                    . In its ability to enable new forms of cohesion, solidarity, and
                    self-awareness, distraction thus served for Kracauer as cinema's aesthetic vocation.
                We might wonder whether there can be an aesthetic vocation for digital media in the
                    same way as Kracauer described it for the cinema. When we allow ourselves to be
                    distracted by a laptop, do we experience the shared sensation of a mass or a
                        public as John Dewey and later Jürgen Habermas
                    described it 
                    ? Is there an intentionality behind that desire to
                    become conscious of some community or collective whole outside of ourselves, and
                    can we characterize that drive toward distraction as a desire? In a remarkable
                    book on social media and distraction, Dominic Pettman suggests to the contrary
                    that distraction has become less a means of experiencing the hidden truth of our
                    collective existence and more of a dispersal of any shared focus as we all see
                    completely different things at different moments in our social media feeds.
                    Distraction today is composed of
                        millions of tiny moments of engineered attention (or vice
                        versa) that have the effect of scattering the public focus 
                        so that we never feel the
                                same way as other potential allies and affinities at the same
                            moment
                        
                    .
                Boredom, as Kracauer described it in another essay of 1924, has since undergone
                    similar transformations . While distraction was a
                    collective experience of the masses coming to understand their coexistence,
                    Kracauer saw boredom as the solitary mood of an individual having an experience
                    of the self. Distraction found its true aesthetic vocation in the cinema, an art
                    form that synchronized the sensoriums of crowded rooms of people from across
                    class divisions. But Kracauer understood boredom as an individual capacity that
                    was taken away by the live broadcast medium of radio. Since many people feel compelled to broadcast, one
                        finds oneself in a state of permanent receptivity, constantly pregnant with
                        London, the Eiffel Tower, and Berlin. Who would want to resist the
                        invitation of those dainty headphones? . . . Silent and lifeless, people sit
                        side by side as if their souls were wandering far away
                    . In giving us over to the flow of
                    other minds on the airwaves, radio sets allow oneself to be chased away. But what do
                    we lose in that escape? The experience of boredom makes us confront ourselves,
                    whether it be in a state of isolation, expectation, or repetition. For Kracauer,
                    boredom provides a kind of
                        guarantee that one is, so to speak, still in control of one's own
                        existence
                    . Distraction is a state we experience
                    together. Boredom is a feeling we face alone.
            

                Mindfulness the Hard Way
                The loneliness of boredom means, of course, that boredom can manifest in many
                    different ways, as Adam Phillips writes: 
                        Clearly, we should speak not of
                            boredom, but of boredoms, because the notion itself includes a
                            multiplicity of moods and feelings that resist analysis
                        
                    . Martin Doehlemann (cited in ) distinguishes
                    between at least four different types of boredom, including situative boredom
                    (when we wait for something or someone in particular: a flight to arrive, a
                    lecture to end), the boredom of satiety (when we have had so much of something
                    that it becomes impossible to appreciate any more of the same), existential
                    boredom (when we desire or await not something in particular but the very
                    feeling of desire or expectation itself), and creative boredom (when we are
                    forced to go through the motions of a tedious, repetitive task with no hope for
                    spontaneity or variation). And yet for all the forms that boredom can take,
                    Kracauer's description of an emerging medium like radio having a decisive effect
                    on the way we experience boredom feels especially meaningful today. While the
                    collectivizing effects of cinematic distraction have evolved into a much more
                    atomized experience of scattered attention with digital media, the essential
                    crowding out of boredom by broadcast radio finds an analogue in the way we look
                    to our screens today. But what kinds of boredom are specifically foreclosed by
                    those distractions? And what would happen if we openly encouraged our students
                    to be bored in the classroom?
                Adam Phillips notes that boredom is
                        akin to free-floating attention. When we are bored we are 
                        waiting, unconsciously, for an
                            experience of anticipation
                        
                    . Walter Benjamin writes in The Arcades
                        Project convolute titled Boredom, Eternal
                        Return: 
                        We are bored when we don’t know
                            what we are waiting for. That we do know or think we know is nearly
                            always the expression of our superficiality or inattention. Boredom is
                            the threshold of great deeds
                        
                    . Awaiting stimulus, purpose, any object at all on which to fix our
                    attention, boredom challenges us to confront the expansiveness of an
                    interminable present. When we push aside this feeling with a glance at our
                    screens, we open ourselves up to an entire world of information that ends up
                    crowding out the possibility of dwelling with one's own discomfort and
                    uncertainty. But we can learn from the challenge that boredom presents to
                    us.
                Inviting boredom in the classroom of course means letting go of the fear of
                        being boring. While we very rarely have occasion to be bored
                    today, boredom remains a state that we can clearly convey to others by
                    telegraphing our indulgence in distraction, intentionally or otherwise. It is
                    too simple to say, for instance, that we constantly give ourselves over to
                    distraction either for the sake of itself or out of some instinctual avoidance
                    of boredom. Staring at a laptop or glancing at a phone: not only do these
                    gestures encompass a number of activities (paying a bill, taking a note, finding
                    a street), they are also gestures that signify distinct things in different
                    social contexts. Sometimes we want to appear busy even when we're not (waiting
                    for a friend at a bar), and sometimes we're rude when we don't mean to be
                    (waiting for an important message). So, one pedagogical challenge is to think
                    about how we want our students to perform boredom differently in the classroom.
                    If we agree that being bored is a worthwhile pursuit, how then do we foster
                    moments of boredom for our students, as well as model that practice outside of
                    the classroom?
                By encouraging boredom, I don't mean to suggest that we have students concentrate
                    harder no matter the cost or encourage them to fix their attention in any
                    particular way, as so many self-help books and corporate seminars now preach
                    under the banner of mindfulness. Boredom instead means roaming within
                    boundaries predetermined by our own interiorities rather than by digital
                    distractions: the harshly-lit space of the classroom, the text under discussion
                    as it's half-heard and floating in and out of conscious attention, the echoes of
                    a motorcycle some distance from campus, the argument we had that morning, and so
                    on. The discomfort of boredom, of free-floating attention
                    as we search for something to latch on to, creates a montage of attentional
                    objects. Boredom is mindfulness the hard way.
                Nor do I mean to suggest that we ban laptops altogether, a clumsy approach that
                    in fact privileges a single, idealized body and mind. The laptop ban is based on
                    the ableist assumption that these devices serve the same function in the way
                    that every student learns. Further, allowing laptops in the classroom only for
                    those students who struggle with learning issues like dysgraphia or dyspraxia
                    effectively outs their disability among their peers. This is what some pedagogy
                    researchers refer to as an accommodationist approach:
                    accommodating deviations from an assumed ideal to suit the needs of students who
                    don't fit that normative paradigm, rather than planning for accessibility in
                    advance . The laptop policy should be viewed
                    instead, as James Lang suggests, as an instrument to be calibrated throughout a
                    single class: for instance, laptops closed during the opening ten minutes for
                    group discussion, then open again for a writing assignment or lecture portion,
                    inviting laptop use so long as we are transparent with our students about how
                    and why we want them to be used . This approach has
                    the benefit of inviting a range of learning styles throughout the class session.
                    And it opens up the possibility for strategically encouraging boredom during
                    moments when we could all benefit from a measure of cognitive wandering.
                I write this, for instance, on a new, still unfamiliar laptop and find myself
                    missing the small moments of lag time on the aging, six-year-old computer that
                    it replaced. Previously, all I could do was wait and watch the spinning icon as
                    a website slowly loaded, or when switching between applications. Now, programs
                    load the instant they are invoked, as if the machine had anticipated my desires.
                    I have become acutely aware of how the rhythms of my work have changed as a
                    result. These moments of lag time with my old laptop allowed on the one hand for
                    the contemplation of the unseen, inner workings of the system. Why is this
                    taking so long? Has the program crashed? Can I free up any memory to make things
                    run faster? And on the other hand, these moments inadvertently allowed for a
                    brief meditative pause in which the slight interruption of my machine's slowness
                    punctuated a train of thought or a task I was working at. They were like little
                    micro-doses of boredom, the only time in my day that truly allowed for boredom
                    as such.
                Encouraging similar moments of meditative pause in the classroom, for instance by
                    resisting the urge to fill the silence during a gap in conversation, might
                    invite students to be bored in a structured way. While distraction is attention
                    without direction, boredom is attention without object. The longer we delay the
                    resolution of a boredom that we have introduced into the classroom, the greater
                    the variety of objects and associations students are encouraged to bring to the
                    table. Making space for boredom gives us a way to forestall and frame our urge
                    for digital distractions without pretending like it's possible or even desirable
                    ever to be fully beyond their reach.
            
