Title:  Introduction: Digital Humanities & Colonial
                    Latin American Studies
Volume:  014
Issue:  4
Date:  15 December 2020
Abstract:  
                
                This is the introduction to a special issue on Digital Humanities and Colonial
                    Latin American Studies.
            
Full Body Text: 

                
                For Linda M. Rodriguez
                This special issue of Digital Humanities Quarterly
                    examines intersections between colonial Latin American studies
                        (CLAS)Though the abbreviation CLAS is not widely used, we
                        employ it for the sake of brevity, in parallel with the more common use of
                            DH. Below we introduce another abbreviation,
                            DCLAS, to designate the intersection of these two
                        fields. and digital humanities (DH) theory and practice. The essays
                    collected here touch on matters that pertain to numerous fields, including
                    anthropology, archaeology, art history, history, linguistics, and literature. By
                    doing so in a digital context, they blur the lines between many of these fields,
                    and point to several major themes that predominate across digital humanities
                    scholarship today.
                The project was motivated by the recognition of three realities. First, digital
                    practice has become fundamental to how scholarly work is conducted in the study
                    of the colonial world. Second, scholarship being carried out today demonstrates
                    that digital methods have the potential to significantly enhance the field going
                    forward. Third, in order to realize that potential, the diverse community of
                    practitioners engaged in such work needs to better articulate how digital
                    scholarship is conceptualized and conducted within CLAS.
                In this introduction, we briefly provide context for understanding the two areas
                    of inquiry at the center of this discussion. To do so, we first consider in
                    broad strokes the central concerns of each, proposing ways we believe the two
                    overlap in terms of objectives and methods. We then step back to examine the
                    evolution of digital work within CLAS, arguing that such scholarship has
                    followed a different path than in digital humanities communities based in the
                    United States and Europe. We propose that legacies of colonialism have shaped
                    this development by obliging scholars to confront material realities and
                    theoretical problems that are often distinct from those that drive digital
                    humanities practice elsewhere.
                Working from this premise, we then suggest parameters for identifying a set of
                    tendencies that can define the field we term digital colonial
                        Latin American studies (DCLAS). To do so, we analyze trends in digital
                    scholarship within the field, examining, in particular, how those ideas and
                    concerns inform the articles in this special collection. We conclude by
                    reflecting on the challenges that the broader community of scholars who work on
                    colonial Latin America must face before being able to more fully harness digital
                    methods to transform research and teaching about the colonial world.
            

                Two parallel, overlapping fields
                This project brings together two areas of study that are both broadly and
                    capaciously defined. We offer our working definitions here with the purpose of
                    better orienting readers towards the content of this special issue.
                Defining DH in precise terms has long presented a challenge. Certainly, there is
                    a sense in which we are all, as researchers and teachers who use computers,
                    participants in DH, whether we are conducting our research through online
                    databases and search engines, composing scholarly monographs using word
                    processing software, or teaching with digital images or remote learning
                        technologies.For a discussion of general problems in working with
                        digital sources, see Putnam 2016 and Daut 2019. However, for many
                    scholars, and for the purposes of this special issue, this work becomes
                        digital humanities when the critical and theoretical
                    apparatus surrounding research, teaching, and publication — which already
                    encompasses disciplinary and cross-disciplinary frameworks — extends to the use
                    of digital technologies.For some recent volumes that survey the current
                        state of DH, see Crompton et al. 2016, Balkun and Deyrup 2020, and Crompton
                        et al. 2020.
                Even calling DH a field is problematic, with many asserting
                    that it is better understood as a collection of scholarly tendencies than as
                    clearly defined areas of inquiry. Much work within the digital humanities
                    consists of reflection on those tendencies, and in the sense of such
                    scholarship, DH does exist as a category with its own boundaries. Beyond such
                    work, however, DH is, to a large extent, something that must be done
                        within other scholarly areas. Put another way, DH is a space in
                    which other scholarly areas can be carried out.
                One basic defining tension within DH in recent years has been a struggle for
                    diversity and inclusion. DH as a field of study has been marked by the
                    predominance of European and U.S.-based institutions, scholars, and languages.
                    Uneven access to digital technologies has contributed to this outcome, but other
                    factors are also involved, such as differing levels of institutional support and
                    access to the financing needed to support large-scale DH endeavors. In part to
                    counter this tendency, the global and multilingual movements within DH have
                    worked to make the field more expansive and diverse by actively engaging with
                    questions of access and equity, and by drawing on critical frameworks including
                    feminist and decolonial studies 
                    .
                Latin America is one of the areas that traditionally has been underrepresented
                    within DH. It is a vast and diverse region in geographical, linguistic,
                    cultural, religious, racial and ethnic terms, as well as in other ways. Scholars
                    of Latin America carry out their work within disciplinary areas across the
                    humanities and social sciences, but many also identify with the broad
                    interdisciplinary field known as Latin American studies (LAS), whose presence is
                    most visibly marked each year by the international congress of the Latin
                    American Studies Association.
                CLAS can be understood, if imperfectly, as a chronologically demarcated subfield
                    of LAS. While most scholarly activity within LAS today is concerned with the
                    twentieth and twenty-first centuries, CLAS focuses on the lesser studied period
                    that spans from the arrival of European settlers at various points starting in
                    the fifteenth century to the disruption of European colonial rule in the late
                    eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. CLAS is also set apart by its
                    theoretical and methodological approaches. CLAS shares certain characteristics
                    with LAS more broadly — such as an emphasis on alterity, inequality, and the
                    vindication of historical injustices — and scholars in the field, as in LAS more
                    broadly, engage with interdisciplinary areas including ethnic studies,
                    Indigenous studies, African diasporic studies, and post-colonial and decolonial
                    studies. At the same time, CLAS does so in the context of different historical
                    and cultural realities, working often from distinct types of evidence. Like
                    scholars of the Early Modern period elsewhere, those who work in CLAS rely on
                    primary sources that include notarial records, printed books, correspondence,
                    sacred objects, works of art, artifacts, and archaeological
                        data.Scholarship aimed at defining CLAS as a field is perhaps not
                        abundant, but certainly over the last two decades, scholars have raised
                        questions about the need to revisit or expand the critical lenses that
                        practitioners of CLAS employ. See, for instance, Bolãnos and Verdesio 2002, Adorno
                            2009, Díaz 2014.
                Brought together, DH and CLAS represent two areas of scholarly practice that are,
                    in many ways, highly compatible. Both are fundamentally and self-consciously
                    interdisciplinary, thriving on the interaction of scholars across traditional
                    boundaries. Both embrace broad possibilities for engaging with and understanding
                    textual and visual material, as well as historical and geographical processes.
                    DH, like CLAS, places emphasis on rethinking dynamics of power, dismantling
                    outdated stereotypes, and decolonizing knowledge. Important currents in both
                    CLAS and DH have been concerned with the ownership and preservation of cultural
                    heritage, and the accessibility of such material to both academic and general
                    audiences. Scholars in CLAS, as in DH, recognize the need for
                    cross-institutional initiatives and partnerships between researchers, archives,
                    and others.
                In what follows, we argue that DH is a particularly propitious space in which
                    scholars of the colonial period can operate, due to the inherent compatibilities
                    we identify here. The experimental nature of digital humanities research can
                    free scholars of the colonial world to formulate new types of questions, and
                    more fully realize the goals of interdisciplinarity and theoretical innovation
                    that underlie the field. Promoting and supporting digital work within the study
                    of the colonial world can also allow us to draw in new types of scholars who can
                    renovate and re-energize the field in ways that we may not be able to envision.
                
            

                The evolution of digital approaches within colonial Latin American
                    studies
                The digital humanities as practiced within CLAS have followed a unique evolution.
                    In the United States, Canada, and Europe, among other places, DH is generally
                    understood to have emerged out of corpus linguistics, with early practitioners
                    focused on the application of computer technology to conduct systematic analysis
                    of textual material 
                    .
                In Latin America, in contrast, the origins of much of today’s digital practice
                    can be traced to the facsimiles, scholarly editions, and recovery projects
                    produced in the region in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. As Mercedes
                    Salómon Salazar references in this special issue, one consequence of colonial
                    rule in the Americas has been the broad dispersal of the primary sources of
                    colonial and pre-Columbian history, from Indigenous texts and works of art to
                    notarial records and printed books. In the wake of independence from European
                    colonial rule, gaining and sharing access to these records became a task of
                    primary importance for scholars based in the Americas 
                    .
                This led to a proliferation of manual transcriptions, printed editions,
                    photo-reproductions, plaster replicas, dictionaries, and bibliographies, many
                    produced by and for researchers in the Americas and the Caribbean 
                    . These projects were often developed, at great
                    personal expense, with the express intent of correcting for the colonial
                    silencing of the historical record by providing local access to cultural
                    heritage, or in the words of Christina Bueno, as part of el
                        esfuerzo por fabricar una historia patria en el gran proceso de construcción
                        de la naciónThe effort to create a
                            history of the homeland in the great process of constructing the
                            nation. Translation ours.
                    . They drew on new technologies, from
                    plaster casts to photostats and printing presses, to achieve these goals .
                The spread of digital technology has accelerated these processes, with
                    consequences for how CLAS is practiced. Projects that were made digital in the
                    1990s and the early 2000s, such as the Vistas
                    project, the digital edition of Guaman Poma de Ayala’s Nueva corónica y buen gobierno (2001), and Slave Voyages (formerly the Trans-Atlantic and
                        Intra-American Slave Trade Database), all seek to broaden access to
                    historical records and works of art that have been widely dispersed or
                    historically undervalued, while building the scholarly apparatus that enables
                    students and a general public to make meaning out of difficult texts and
                    objects. These projects also point to new challenges introduced by the digital
                    age, including the uneven distribution of access to digital resources across the
                    Americas, the dominance of English and the United States in DH, the undervaluing
                    of digital work at academic institutions, and the difficulty of sustaining
                    digital projects for the long term.
                Many of these early projects started on paper or began off-line. Rolena Adorno’s
                    edition of Guaman Poma began as a hand transcription in 1977 and appeared first
                    as a printed volume in 1987, while Slave Voyages
                    originated as a series of databases designed by individual scholars in the
                    1960s, and Vistas was first made available on CDRom
                    in 2000 
                    . The traces of that earlier time, and those earlier
                    technologies, are still visible in these projects: in their theoretical
                    frameworks, their thematic organization, their encoding schemas, their use of
                    language, and their interface design. Most visibly, among these early efforts we
                    tend to find projects that are not designed for accessibility or for smartphone
                    use, and that were created by scholars in Europe and the United States without
                    the active participation of Latin American, Black, or Indigenous
                    communities.
                Thanks to the visionary work of historians of the African diaspora based in the
                    U.S., Europe, Latin America, and the Caribbean, as well substantial funding from
                    the National Endowment for the Humanities, Slave
                        Voyages has been able to reinvent itself in recent years as a
                        digital memorial to the Africans whose forced labor
                    built our nations.For the history of the project and this reformulation,
                        see Emory Center 2020a, 2020b. This reinvention follows the
                    lead of projects that were born digital in the last two decades, laying the
                    groundwork for the new kind of digital colonial Latin American Studies that this
                    special issue aims to explore.
            

                Current trends within digital colonial Latin American studies
                While diverse in terms of materials and methodologies, the work being carried out
                    today within DCLAS is characterized broadly by a set of common features. Much of
                    this work focuses on the recovery of and access to cultural heritage, seeks to
                    uncover hidden narratives and geographies, poses questions about labor and
                    pedagogy, and emphasizes problems of theory and praxis. While these concerns are
                    not unique to DCLAS, the ways they across the field support the idea of a
                    clearly identifiable area of digital practice. This convergence of theoretical
                    and practical concerns across DCLAS is, in many ways, a result of the special
                    circumstances of CLAS and the challenges that scholars face, and indeed, many of
                    the dynamics we outline here are also central to non–digital work within
                    CLAS.
                
                    1. Recovery & Access to Cultural Heritage
                    Recovery projects are initiatives that aim to locate,
                            preserve and disseminate historical records that have been
                        devalued, dispersed, and destroyed through historical processes such as
                        colonialism . These projects depend on
                        cross-organizational and multinational collaboration, and frequently
                        decenter Europe and the United States. They provide access to widely
                        dispersed collections of archival materials while building on new methods
                        for crowdsourced transcription, text encoding, and descriptive metadata that
                        better reflect the ambiguities and linguistic complexities of the colonial
                        period. Within DCLAS, these projects have proliferated so widely that we
                        cannot list them all here: some examples include the Primeros Libros de las Américas, the Fundación Histórica Neogranadina, A Colony
                            in Crisis, Escritos de Mujeres, and
                            coloniaLab.There are too many
                            projects of this kind to list comprehensively here; for a more complete
                            list of digital projects and collections relating to colonial Latin
                            American Studies, we refer you to the crowdsourced bibliography of Latin
                            American DH: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1JE5s77JETxUC6Qx_ZOd7aiRxfr2WBPNDweTemJGcYT8/edit#.
                    Three articles in this special issue address the challenges of recovery work.
                        In her article on the Catálogo Colectivo de Marcas de
                            Fuego, an index of authorities, Mercedes Isabel Salomón Salazar
                        examines the obstacles faced by digital projects that need to reference
                        bibliographical materials across different institutional systems. She
                        demonstrates the difficulties of standardizing the study of provenance and
                        coordinating a project across organizational and national boundaries. She
                        also illustrates how collaborative recovery projects can lead to the
                        uncovering of histories that were erased by the boundaries of collecting
                        institutions.
                    George Allen Broadwell et al. address the particular challenges of recovering
                        Indigenous materials in collaboration with scholarly, student, and
                        Indigenous communities. They reflect upon Ticha, a digital text explorer for
                        writings in Colonial Zapotec. They explain how Ticha provides access to
                        little-known archival materials, enabling modern-day speakers of Zapotec to
                        connect with the history of their language and communities. The authors also
                        examine Ticha as a model for partnering with Indigenous stakeholders in the
                        production of knowledge and the design of digital humanities endeavors.
                    In a similar fashion, Laura Matthew and Michael Bannister consider
                        Nahuatl/Nawat in Central America (NECA), a project focused on recovering and
                        making accessible Nahuan-language texts written during the colonial period
                        in Central America. They explore the reasons for prioritizing this corpus
                        and explain the history of the project and its technical evolution. By
                        looking in part at site analytics, they also analyze the challenges that
                        this project has faced, and formulate a model for moving forward.
                    We would also like to note here one additional project focused on recovery
                        that we were, in the end, unable to feature in this issue. Digital Aponte is a project dedicated to the life and work of José Antonio Aponte, a free man of
                            color, carpenter, artist, and alleged leader of a massive antislavery
                            conspiracy and rebellion in colonial Cuba in 1811-1812.
                        Digital Aponte is a creative reimagining of
                        what it means to engage with archival silence; its subject is a lost volume
                        produced by Aponte and recalled through notarial archives from the trial
                        that would end his life . Linda Rodriguez, the
                        creator of Digital Aponte, passed away during
                        the process of assembling this project and her contribution to this issue
                        was never completed. Linda’s presence in our community ended too soon, and
                        we dedicate this special issue to her.
                
                
                    2. Uncovering hidden narratives and geographies
                    Thinking critically about representations of place and space has been
                        fundamental to CLAS, which has a long history of engaging with and
                        disrupting the interaction between Indigenous boundaries and colonial
                        borders. These areas of study benefit from new digital methodologies, which
                        bring together what Thomas Padilla has named collections-as-data with technologies for geospatial
                        representation . For example, projects like
                        Maria José Afanador Llach’s Mapping Nature in New
                            Granada and the broadly collaborative Power
                            of Attorney take advantage of the affordances of digital
                        technology to see history differently, allowing us to engage with historical
                        categories ranging from borders and languages to legal codes and natural
                        resources.
                    In this special issue, Patricia Murrieta-Flores et al. approach these
                        questions by examining how computational approaches can expedite and
                        facilitate the identification, analysis, and cross-referencing of vast
                        amounts of historical, anthropological, and archaeological information
                        available in sixteenth-century sources. Murrieta-Flores et al. consider the
                        the experiences of the Digging into Early Colonial
                            Mexico project, which focuses on the analysis of the Relaciones
                        geográficas, a set of responses to a sixteenth-century questionnaire
                        completed for the Spanish Crown by local colonial administrators. Their work
                        demonstrates the potential of these methods to address questions relating to
                        the economy, culture, natural history, and religious practices of New
                        Spain.
                    Emma Slayton draws on archaeological data about Indigenous Caribbean
                        settlements to model hypothetical canoe routes between Trinidad and the
                        mainland coast of South America, exploring how possible avenues of travel
                        were changed or interrupted during the early colonial period. Her work shows
                        how data-driven analysis can complement the written record to better
                        describe the impact of colonization on Indigenous communities.
                    By extending beyond the practice of close reading to explore cultural
                        analytics and extratextual evidence, these projects allow us to find new
                        ways of knowing that extend beyond the narrow perspective inscribed in the
                        colonial text. This can allow us to locate new information left out of the
                        historical record, as Slayton writes. It can also, in the words of Murrieta
                        et al., facilitate the discovery and analysis of
                            geographies not immediately apprehended with normal reading.
                
                
                    3. Labor and Pedagogy
                    Questions surrounding labor and pedagogy — separate categories which are
                        nonetheless closely intertwined — are central to DCLAS. Like the Ticha and
                        Nahuatl/Nawatl projects described by Broadwell et al. and Matthews and
                        Bannister in this issue, much current work in DCLAS involves envisioning new
                        models for accomplishing scholarly work. This often entails imagining ways
                        to achieve more equitable relationships across national boundaries, among
                        scholarly institutions, and with groups that have been historically
                        marginalized within academic settings, including Black and Indigenous
                        scholars, language activists, and knowledge and heritage communities.
                        Examples of such projects would be the digitization of the Fondo Real de
                        Cholula, a collaboration between scholars and librarians at the University
                        of Texas and the Benemérita Universidad Autónoma de Puebla, the digital
                        edition of the Codex Mendoza developed by the Instituto Nacional de
                        Arqueología e Historia (Mexico), Mesolore, and
                            Musical Passages.
                    Current work in digital colonial Latin American Studies pushes us to think
                        critically about what it means to teach about the colonial world in the
                        digital age. Projects like Ticha and coloniaLab involve students as
                        participants or primary collaborators, and include reflection on that
                        student involvement as a central component of their work 
                        
                        
                        . Other projects deploy technology to provide
                        new learning opportunities for those who do not have access to attend
                        in-person classes related to the colonial world. Two examples are Chqeta’maj le qach’ab’al k’iche’, a
                        language-learning resource for K’iche’ Maya, and Programming Historian en Español, which offers free training
                        resources in digital humanities for researchers working in multiple
                        languages. As we write this introduction from our home-offices (or our
                        kitchen tables) while under stay-at-home orders during the coronavirus
                        pandemic, the importance of these resources and the critical apparatus that
                        informs them are at the forefront of our minds.
                    In this special issue, Lauren G. Kilroy-Ewbank explores the merits and
                        drawbacks of using digital visual materials, both scholarly and
                        pedagogically, for understanding and analyzing colonial Latin American art.
                        She demonstrates how instructors can use digital methods in teaching to
                        reveal how the digital frames or reframes our
                            understanding of visual culture and to effectively critique it.
                        In one example, Kilroy-Ewbank discusses how an active role in the creation
                        of metadata — a process often overlooked or regarded as acritical — can
                        alter students’ understanding of the objects we study and the biases
                        inherent in scholarly work.
                
                
                    4. Theory & Praxis
                    One commonality across projects in DCLAS, as is often the case in DH
                        more generally, is an attention to the bringing together of theory and
                        practice. Slavery in the Machine, the third
                        issue of the Archipelagos journal of digital
                        Caribbean studies, is a model for the breadth of theoretical possibility in
                        colonial DH . The work represented in that
                        issue, much of which draws on the history of colonization and enslavement,
                        envisions and implements a digital humanities based in a theoretical space
                        of movement and change, a Caribbean that won’t stand
                            still or an isla que se repite
                        . In this framework, experimentation exists
                        alongside critique, silence alongside voicing, and mourning alongside
                        rebirth.
                    Similarly, in their survey of digital research on visual culture in Spanish
                        America, Barbara Mundy and Dana Leibsohn describe a field of scholarship
                        that reconfigures ways of knowing, seeing, and working together, even as it
                        works with and through digital tools . As Maria
                        José Afanador Llach writes, in the digital humanities nos enfrentamos a procesos de producción de conocimiento mediados por
                            el pensamiento computacional, el software y las interfaces
                            digitales
                        We are faced with processes of knowledge
                                construction mediated by computational thinking, software, and
                                digital interfaces. Translation ours.
                        . Even as colonial digital humanists build
                        tools and platforms, digitize documents, enter metadata, and design
                        websites, they work to understand the alignment between the tools we use,
                        the things we see, and the knowledge that we make possible. This can involve
                        not just thinking critically about digital tools and their interaction with
                        social and cultural factors of colonial and post-colonial communities, but
                        also investing in the construction of new technologies that better reflect
                        scholarly values 
                        .
                    The questions of theory and praxis that emerge from the articles in this
                        special issue open new ways of theorizing DCLAS. These largely collaborative
                        projects aim to produce transformative work by way of
                        an iterative process conducted through an ongoing
                            conversation with user communities
                        . As Matthew and
                        Bannister write in this issue, this introduces a paradigmatic
                            change in how scholars work together, with far-reaching
                        consequences for knowledge production in and beyond the academy. They open
                        the possibility, in the words of Broadwell et al., for a form of digital
                        humanities that democratize[s] access to materials and
                            resources. As Matthew and Bannister add, however, these projects
                        also introduce new problems as we think through their relationship with
                        colonial and neoliberal politics, the technology industry, and institutions
                        of higher education in the United States and Latin America.
                
                
                    Looking forward
                    This collection points to various possibilities for CLAS. The articles
                        gathered here illustrate ways that digital scholarship can provide new
                        pathways to conducting scholarship in a collaborative fashion. They suggest
                        innovative means for representing the heterogeneous and incomplete nature of
                        the colonial archive. They demonstrate how the curation of colonial data
                        sets can enable new ways of understanding Latin American history. Likewise,
                        they show how digital pedagogy, or critical approaches to the selective use
                        of digital tools and resources in teaching and learning, offers new ways for
                        students to engage with colonial material and textual history.
                    This is not to say that DCLAS does not continue to face challenges, many of
                        them made explicit by this special issue, both through its content and the
                        circumstance surrounding its publication. Foremost among these challenges
                        are issues related to peer review, the precarious professional circumstances
                        of many within DCLAS, as well as the need we face, as a field, to think
                        critically about how we engage digitally with colonial-era materials.
                    Like many scholarly projects, this special issue faced significant challenges
                        during the process of peer review. We originally intended to publish these
                        pieces in a more traditional humanities journal, but after careful
                        consideration, the editors determined that review and revision of these
                        project- and pedagogy-oriented initiatives was too far out of scope of that
                        publication. This problem was exacerbated by the professional diversity of
                        those involved, who include not only research/teaching faculty, but also
                        faculty members, librarians, programmers, students, and language activists —
                        voices not often included in many conventional humanities forums. A DH
                        journal turned out to be a more appropriate home, but identifying reviewers
                        who could speak to these articles as work sitting at the intersection of DH
                        and CLAS proved to be another challenge.
                    All of these circumstances reflect the broader difficulty that digital
                        humanists have in demonstrating the value of their work, with real
                        consequences for hiring, tenure, and promotion, as well as for the
                        sustainability of projects themselves. Such dynamics play out in CLAS in
                        ways that are common across the humanities, with many of the scholars who
                        are engaged in digital work within CLAS not emerging from, or entirely
                        identifying with, the disciplinary routes that traditionally have fed into
                        the field. As a consequence, such scholars do not have a clear path into a
                        professional existence within the very area of inquiry that they are best
                        positioned to help transform. Higher education in the United States and many
                        other parts of the world continues to rely for administrative purposes on
                        the notions of disciplines, and many scholars themselves, particularly in
                        the face of financial cuts to vulnerable areas, defend such disciplinary
                        lines. In an extremely tight job market, those who might identify
                        first-and-foremost as practitioners of DCLAS face a difficult challenge in
                        selling their broadly focused skills to disciplinary departments who are
                        often searching for candidates with more traditional profiles who can teach
                        more conventional coursework. The lines that have long separated
                        librarianship from the labor of research/teaching faculty exacerbate the
                        problem, as practitioners of DCLAS might naturally fit into a professional
                        sphere that could span both areas, but at the present, that space is
                        extremely limited.
                    On a conceptual level, practitioners of DCLAS face a need to imagine the
                        common questions that should be asked about how we interact digitally with
                        colonial-era objects. This is a topic that arose during a panel at DH2018 in
                        Mexico City, and was one of the objectives of the first meeting of the
                        Association for Digital Research in Early Latin America (ADRELA), held at
                        the annual congress of the Latin American Studies Association in Boston the
                        following year.Those conversations — which brought together scholars
                            from across the United States, Europe, and Latin America — inform all of
                            the work in this introduction. For more information about both, see the
                                Events page of the ADRELA website (https://adrela.net/events). As was discussed at both
                        events, a shared protocol might be not only of a logistical nature, but also
                        have ethical implications, helping us to consider the assumptions behind our
                        tools and their conceptual models that might distort our work in ways we do
                        not realize. Such questions might also address the ways that our own
                        assumptions — as specific people working in specific contexts — do the same.
                    
                
                
                    Conclusion
                    In gathering together the articles in this collection, we seek to advance the
                        emerging conversation about the role of digital scholarship within CLAS and
                        contribute to the formation of a more coherent digital humanities community
                        in the field. We also seek to understand how articles like those collected
                        here help CLAS connect with larger conversations about scholarship in the
                        twenty-first century, and consider how digital methods can expand the ways
                        we study, understand, and interact with the colonial period in Latin
                        America. Perhaps most importantly, we hope to emphasize DH as a point of
                        entry for a new generation of scholars in our field, which — like DH itself
                        — is inherently interdisciplinary, and built upon an enthusiasm for
                        innovation and collaboration.
                    Much of the work in this special issue has been touched by local and global
                        crises, including climate change, the coronavirus pandemic, U.S. immigration
                        policy, and the defunding of humanities programs at academic institutions in
                        the United States. During the three years that this collection was
                        developed, contributors were directly and indirectly impacted by multiple
                        health crises, wildfires, travel bans, and campus closures, while one editor
                        of this volume no longer works in academia. These events draw attention to
                        the precarious conditions of our histories, our communities, and our
                        industries, even as they make the values of openness, access, collaboration,
                        and virtual connection that underlie these projects more essential than
                        ever. Likewise, in the current moment of instability, crisis, and
                        misinformation, the value of using digital technologies to preserve and
                        provide access to culture has never been greater, particularly when those
                        tools can empower us to recover stories that have been lost or erased.
                
            

                Digital Projects Referenced in this Introduction
                
                    Catálogo Colectivo
                        de Marcas de Fuego. Mercedes Salomón and Adrian Mendoza Leal. http://www.marcasdefuego.buap.mx
                
                
                    Chqeta’maj le qach’ab’al k’iche’. Sergio Romero, Ignacio Carvajal, Mareike Sattler, Juan Manuel Tahay Tzaj, Carl
                    Blyth, Sarah Sweeney, Pat Kyle, Nathalie Steinfeld Childre. https://tzij.coerll.utexas.edu
                
                
                    Codex Mendoza. Frances Berdan, Baltazar Brito, Peter Stokes, Ernesto Miranda Trigueros,
                    Noemí Cadena Corona, Verónica Lerma Hernández, and Gerardo Gutiérrez. https://codicemendoza.inah.gob.mx/index.php
                
                
                    Colección Digital Fondo Real de Cholula. LLILAS Benson Latin American Studies and Collections. https://ladi.lib.utexas.edu.
                
                
                    Colección Escritos de Mujeres Novohispanas. Clara Ramírez and Claudia Llanos. https://publicacionesdigitalesunamiisue.wordpress.com/escritos-mujeres
                
                
                    coloniaLab. Clayton McCarl and collaborators. https://colonialab.org
                
                
                         
                    A Colony in Crisis. Abbey R. Broughton, Kelsey Corlett-Rivera, Nathan H. Dize, Brittany de Gail,
                    Laurence Jay-Rayon Ibrahim Aibo, Pierre Malbranche, Daphney Vastey. https://colonyincrisis.lib.umd.edu
                
                
                    Digging into Early Colonial
                        Mexico. Patricia Murrieta-Flores, Ian Gregory, Bruno Martins, Diego Jiménez
                    Baldillo and teams. https://www.lancaster.ac.uk/digging-ecm
                
                
                    
                    Fundación Histórica
                        Neogranadina. Juan Fernando Cobo Betancourt, Santiago Muñoz Arbeláez, Natalie Cobo,
                    Adraína Soto Segura. https://neogranadina.org
                
                
                    Mapping Nature in New Granada.
                    María José Afanador Llach. Forthcoming.
                
                
                    Mesolore. Liza Bakewell and Byron Hamann. http://www.mesolore.org
                
                
                    Musical Passage: A Voyage to 1688 Jamaica. Laurent Dubois, David K. Garner, Mary Caton Lingold. http://www.musicalpassage.org
                
                
                    Nahuatl/Nawat. Laura E. Matthew, Michael Bannister, and Héctor Concohá Chet. https://nahuatl-nawat.org
                
                
                    Primeros Libros de las
                        Américas. LLILAS Benson Latin American Studies and Collections, Cushing Memorial
                    Library, Biblioteca Histórica José María Lafragua, Biblioteca Franciscana,
                    Biblioteca Palafoxiana. http://primeroslibros.org
                
                
                    Programming
                        Historian en Español. María José Afanador-Llach, Victor Gayol, Silvia
                    Gutierrez de la Torre, Jennifer Isasi, José Antonio Motilla, Joshua G. Ortiz
                    Baco, Riva Quiroga, Antonio Rojas Castro. https://programminghistorian.org/es
                
                 
                    
                    Slave Voyages. Emory Center for Digital Scholarship and collaborators. https://www.slavevoyages.org
                
                
                    Ticha. Brook Danielle Lillehaugen, George Aaron Broadwell, Michel R. Oudijk, Laurie
                    Allen, Mike Zarafonetis, Xóchitl Flores-Marcial, Moises García Guzmán, Felipe
                    López and team. https://ticha.haverford.edu
                
                
                    Power of Attorney. Yanna Yannakakis and team. https://www.powerofattorneynative.com
                
                
            
