Title:  Seeking Information
               in Spanish Historical Newspapers: The Case of 
Volume:  017
Issue:  4
Date:  7 February 2024
Abstract:  
            
            New technologies for seeking information are based in machine learning techniques
               such as statistical or deep learning approaches that require a large number of
               computational resources as well as the availability of huge corpora to develop the
               applications that, in this concrete sub-area of Artificial Intelligence, are the
               so-called models. Nowadays, the reusability of the developed models is
               approached with fine-tuning and transfer learning techniques. When the available
               corpus is written in a language or domain with scarce resources, the accuracy of
               these approaches decreases, so it is important to address the start of the task by
               using state-of-the-art techniques.
            This is the main problem tackled in the work presented here, coming from the art
               historians’ interest in an image-based digitized collection of newspapers called
                  Diario de Madrid (DM) from the Spanish press between
               18th and 19th centuries, which is freely available at the Spanish National Library
               (BNE). Their focus is on information related to entities such as historical persons,
               locations as well as objects for sale or lost and others, to obtain geo-localization
               visualizations and solve some historical riddles. The first step needed technically
               is to obtain the transcriptions of the original digitalized newspapers from the DM
               (1788-1825) collection. After that, the second step is the development of a Named
               Entity Recognition (NER) model to label or annotate automatically the available
               corpus with the entities of interest for their research. For this, once the CLARA-DM
               corpus is created, a sub-corpus must be manually annotated for the training step in
               current Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques, using human effort helped by
               selected computational tools. To develop the necessary annotation model (CLARA-AM),
               an experimentation step is carried out with state-of-the-art Deep Learning (DL)
               models and an already available corpus, which complements the corpus that we have
               developed.
            A main contribution of the paper is the methodology developed to tackle similar
               problems like that of art historians’ digitized corpus: selecting specific tools when
               available, reusing developed DL models to carry out new experiments in an available
               corpus, reproducing experiments in the art historians’ own corpus and applying
               transfer learning techniques within a domain with few resources. Four different
               resources developed are described: the transcribed corpus, the DL-based transcription
               model, the annotated corpus and the DL models developed for the annotation using a
               specific domain-based set of labels in a small corpus. The CLARA-TM transcription
               model learned for the DM is accessible from January 2023 at the READ-COOP website
               under the title Spanish print XVIII-XIX - Free Public AI Model
                  for Text Recognition with Transkribus(https://readcoop.eu/model/spanish-print-xviii-xix/).
         
Full Body Text: 

            1. Introduction
            Corpora construction is a laborious task (;
                  ; ), since it is
               desirable that the corpora may be used by different people and serve various
               purposes. Corpora are classified according to different parameters, such as subject
               matter, purpose, discourse modality and others, some of the most important being:
               balance, representativeness, or transparency (;
                  ; ). The
               process of corpus construction is divided into different phases, ranging from the
               definition of its boundaries and purpose, pre-processing, storage, annotation, to
               name a few (; ; ; ; ).
            Corpus-based research has been dominated by statistical and neural models (; ; ) until the end of the last decade, when Transformer-based
               models appeared , requiring the availability of very
               large corpora for training. Such massive corpora are scarcely available in the field
               of Humanities mainly because the corpora need to be annotated according to the
               interests of the corpus end-users, so it happens that the types of entities often
               vary according to the origin, language, domain, or purpose of the dataset. The Named
               Entity Recognition (NER) discipline, dealing with entities of interest, has evolved a
               lot since its beginnings in the first competitive NER task in 1996 , as many other tasks and datasets have been
               created for evaluation.
            Early NER systems made use of algorithms based on hand-built rules, lexicons and
               gazetteers, orthographic features or ontologies, among others, with the human cost of
               producing domain-specific resources that this entails .
               Later, these systems were followed by those based on feature engineering and machine
               learning , which were the dominant technique in the
               task of named entity recognition until the first decade of the 2000s, that is, until
               the NLP revolution with the advent of neural networks. The most common supervised
               machine learning systems of this type that were used for NER include Hidden Markov
               Models (HMMs) , Support Vector Machines (SVM) , Conditional Random Fields (CRF) , Maximum Entropy models (ME) , and decision trees .
            Starting with , neural network-based systems are
               interesting because they do not require domain-specific resources such as lexicons or
               ontologies and are therefore more domain-independent . In this context, several neural network architectures were proposed, mostly based
               on some form of recurrent neural network (RNN) on characters , and embeddings of words or word components . Finally in 2017 the Transformer
               architecture was introduced in the paper Attention Is All You
                  Need
                which is here to stay, and its derivatives such as
               BERT  and RoBERTa , which
               we make use of today, as well as the Spanish-based MarIA
                  https://www.bne.es/es/noticias/1111-el-primer-sistema-masivo-de-inteligencia-artificial-de-la-lengua-espanola-maria
                or RigoBERTa
                  https://www.iic.uam.es/inteligencia-artificial/procesamiento-del-lenguaje-natural/modelo-lenguaje-espanol-rigoberta/
               .
            In the domain of Digital Humanities (DH), applying NER models to historical documents
               poses several challenges, as shown by other works in the domain (; ). This is a fertile field within NLP, since cultural institutions are carrying out
               digitization projects in which large amounts of images containing text are obtained
                  (; ). One of the
               challenges is the margin of error still present in optical character recognition
               (OCR) systems , since historical documents are
               generally very noisy, contain smudges, and have different typographies that are
               generally unknown to the systems, which makes character recognition even more
               difficult.
            Another challenge is related to the transfer of knowledge to new domains or
               languages, in this case to adapt NER models trained with datasets in current
               languages to old languages (; ; ). Transfer learning
               techniques have become common practice in a wide range of tasks in NLP (; ; ), including the domain of DH such as works presented in
               the workshop on Natural Language Processing for Digital Humanities at NLPAI 2021 
               ). 
            Recent initiatives have been launched, such as the creation and annotation of
               datasets (; ) and
               holding competitive events such as HIPE (Identifying Historical
                  People, Places and other Entities) 
               addressing NER in historical texts. The general goals of HIPE include improving the
               robustness of systems, enabling comparison of the performance of NER systems on
               historical texts, and, in the long term, fostering efficient semantic indexing in
               historical documents. The HIPE2020 corpus shares objectives with the CLARA-DM corpus,
               since it involves the recognition of entities in historical newspapers, and has
               specific types of entities, that are slightly different from the general NER ones of
               localizations (LOC), persons (PER), organizations (ORG) and miscellanea (MISC). It is
               common practice in this domain that Historians, Linguists and Computer Science
               researchers collaborate to seek information on the domain-dependent entities and
               scenarios in which the historical research is focused (;
                  ; ; ). We propose the use of
               the HIPE project approach with the aim of taking advantage of these resources and
               gaining perspective on the approach for our domain, a task for which we have little
               annotated data.
            This paper is organized starting with a section dedicated to the corpus creation,
               transcription and sub-corpus manual annotation. Available tools are evaluated
               according to the properties of the original DM newspaper collection, the total amount
               of data contained and offered and required software to be installed. Afterwards, a
               section is devoted to the experimentation setting to perform the CLARA-DM corpus
               automatic annotation using deep learning models for NER. First, we carry out some
               experiments with a resource on multilingual historical newspapers such as the
               HIPE2020 corpus containing historical OCR texts in French, English and German . One main goal is to identify which type of process
               adaptation and Transformer-based models will obtain the best results for the CLARA-DM
               corpus, based on the experience with HIPE2020. Then, we conduct some experiments on
               CLARA-DM dataset, in a transfer learning set-up (zero-shot and few-shot learning)
               between (1) three different sets of entity types: the general NER ones, the one used
               in the HIPE2020 experiments, and the domain specific ones used in CLARA-DM, and (2)
               languages (Spanish, English and German). Finally, in the last section we outline the
               conclusions drawn from the experiments and conclude the paper with some plans for
               future work.
         

            2. Creation of the corpus CLARA-DM
            A major goal of the CLARA-HDCLARA-HD project (PID2020-116001RB-C32) is funded
                  by MCIN - AEI (AEI/10.13039/501100011033). collaborative project involving
               art historians, linguists, and computer scientists, is to speed up the art
               historians’ research, through the transcription of the PDF newspapers’ pages and the
               development of a robust model for recognition of named entities. The work started
               with a comparison of the performance of other NER systems on historical texts,
               following the IMPRESSO
                  https://impresso-project.ch
                project and the HIPE series of shared tasks whose objective is to foster
               efficient semantic indexing on historical documents. The CLARA-HD project is based on
               the joint research of art historians, who are keen on investigating what is done and
               where it is done in the city of Madrid (; ; ); the
               technicians, who are experts in Natural Language Processing and Deep Learning Models
               in applied research (; ; ; ), and the linguists, well-known experts
               in corpus creation, analysis, and exploitation (; ).
            The starting point of the CLARA-HD project was the analysis of the art historians’
               interest in the digitized collection of newspapers called Diario
                  de Madrid, published between the 18th and 19th centuries and readily
               available at the BNE
                  https://hemerotecadigital.bne.es/hd/card?oid=0001510462
               . The focus of art historians is on information related to historical persons,
               locations but also objects for sale or lost, so the first step is the construction of
               a historical corpus from the original newspapers, the so-called CLARA-DM corpus,
               which involves designing a style guideline for transcription and a second style
               guideline for the annotation of named entities, which entails identifying the
               domain-based set of labels (semantic categories). The next step is the manual
               annotation of a sub-corpus to serve as the training corpus for an application
               development using current DL techniques. Finally, the development of an efficient
               model to recognise the specific named entities is tackled to annotate the CLARA-DM
               corpus automatically.
            There are different tools to deal with any process in corpus management, from the
               document transcription, storage and search phase, annotation, analysis, and even
               corpus exploitation using Python libraries for information extraction. In this work
               we use Transkribus
                  https://readcoop.eu/transkribus
                for transcription, Tagtog
                  https://tagtog.com
                for annotation, and HuggingFace
                  https://huggingface.co
                for the implementation of Deep Learning models. In the remainder of this
               section the first two steps are detailed, and the third one will be tackled in the
               following section.
            
               2.1. Transcription of the digitalized newspapers
               The first step building the corpus is the transcription of the texts, which we
                  carried out using the Transkribus tool . The tool was selected once
                  compared with commercial and open-source transcription tools as Amazon Textract
                     https://aws.amazon.com/es/textract
                   and Google’s Tesseract
                     https://github.com/tesseract-ocr/tesseract
                  , as the accuracy for old typography was slightly better, no fee for basic
                  functionalities of the tool was required and has been used by other projects in
                  ancient languages (; ; ; ; ; ). Also, it provides functionalities both on the web
                  browser and in the client version, and has proven to be very helpful for small DH
                  research groups .
               Transcription using the Transkribus tool starts by requiring the layout
                  recognition, which consists of detecting the text regions and lines of text within
                  the documents. This automatic process is not perfect, since the model does not
                  recognise only text but also recognises some regions such as lines or spots that
                  we have to remove manually. Furthermore, the main problem with newspapers is that
                  there are tables or columns, and the model is not able to recognise the order in
                  which it should read the pages. That is why we have to carry out a manual task to
                  sort the text. It should be noted that we do this process because we make use of
                  models that use sentences for training (Transformers for NER), and we also want
                  the corpus to be used in the future for semantic and syntactic analysis. Note that
                  the layout is not so relevant when only a word-based analysis is wanted.
               Once we have carried out the structure recognition of the newspaper pages, the
                  so-called layout recognition, we can move on to transcribing the text of the
                  pages, either manually or using a public model, since the Transkribus tool
                  contains public models that are trained with historical texts in different
                  languages. We explored some of them, but they were still unable to recognise the
                  text with some quality. The "Spanish Golden Age Theatre Prints 1.0" model (; )
                  especially failed to recognise numbers or capital letters in our documents. So,
                  what we propose to do is to develop our own transcription model (CLARA-TM) for the
                  transcription of the documents in the CLARA-DM corpus. The first question was to
                  find out how many pages we needed for a model in Transkribus to learn to
                  transcribe automatically. The more training data, the better, but according to
                  Transkribus guidelines, it is possible to start training the model with at least
                  25-75 pages manually transcribed, or less when working with printed instead of
                  handwritten texts https://readcoop.eu/transkribus/howto/how-to-transcribe-documents-with-transkribus-introduction/. 
               We carried out several tests. In the first one we trained the model with 37
                  manually transcribed newspaper pages and obtained an error rate in character
                  recognition (CER) of 4% in the validation set. This error decreases in successive
                  tests with more amount and homogeneous training data. We realised that most errors
                  in the transcription were caused by a lack of uniformity in the manual
                  transcriptions, since they were carried out by different people. In order to make
                  a more reliable transcription model, the transcribed pages were reviewed manually
                  and a standardisation process wase carried out. This includes aspects such as the
                  unification of the way fractions are transcribed (1/2 o 1⁄2), the inclusion or
                  omission of symbols such as "=" (used before an author's signature), "&" or
                  "§§", or the correction or not of typos. After this process, there is a high
                  degree of homogeneity in the data that the model will see in its training, and
                  therefore a higher probability of successful learning. After several tests
                  (performed by changing the model parameters (number of epochs, learning rate and
                  documents selected for training and validation) we trained the model with 193
                  transcribed pages and obtained less than a 1% error, so we have kept it as our own
                  transcription model for the CLARA-DM corpus. The obtained CER is a good one,
                  slightly better than that obtained from public models that use similar resources
                  to oursSee German Fraktur 19th-20th century
                        (https://readcoop.eu/model/german-fraktur-19th-20th-century/), French newspapers late 18th century – midth of 20th
                        century (https://readcoop.eu/model/french-newspapers-late-18th-century-midth-of-20th-century/),
                        Transkribus Print Multi-Language (https://readcoop.eu/model/print-multi-language-danish-dutch-german-finnish-french-latin-swedish/)
                     or Dutch newspapers 17th century (https://readcoop.eu/model/dutch-newspapers-17th-century/)..
                  The pages used for training correspond to 37 different newspapers randomly chosen
                  (between the ones downloaded, which covered the first day of every month between
                  1788-1825), since they all have a similar structure: 4-8 pages, the first one
                  containing a table and both capital and lower case letters, and pages divided in
                  columns at the end of the newspaper.
               From now, the model can be applied to transcribe text automatically from any
                     Diario de Madrid newspaper (see Figure 1) with a
                  layout recognition carried out manually. The original collection has 13,479
                  newspapers (59,424 pages) and the CLARA-DM corpus currently has 589 newspapers
                  with layout recognition done (2,474 pages), 37 newspapers manually transcribed
                  (201 pages), 143 newspapers automatically transcribed (657 pages, containing an
                  average of 1% of errors in the transcriptions), and 10 newspapers manually
                  annotated (53 pages/24,843 tokens).
               
                  Hardcopy of an original page (left) and its automatic transcription with
                     CLARA-TM (right).
                  Scan of printed book page juxtaposed with is own line-by-line numbered
                     transcription.
                  
               
               The human and computational resources spent for the development of our
                  transcription model are quite important in the project planning and, given that
                  the project is currently funded by the Spanish Government, the model is already
                  published (January 2023) for free use at the Transkribus tool and website
                     https://readcoop.eu/model/spanish-print-xviii-xix
                  .
            
            
               2.2. Sub-corpus manual annotation
               Once we have the transcribed corpus, we can move on to the manual annotation step,
                  but why do we need to do this? The datasets used for a NER task can be annotated
                  or not, depending on whether the system to be developed is supervised or
                  unsupervised. Since we are going to use Transformer-based systems for leading the
                  current state of the art, we need annotated data to train them. On the other hand,
                  a general NER system usually includes the general entities categories
                  (tags/labels) Person, Place, Organisation and Others. However, in the CLARA-DM
                  corpus of historical newspapers we need to define a different set of tags
                  according to the needs of art historians, so that is the second reason why we have
                  to carry out the task of manual annotation first to teach (train) the
                  model. Furthermore, the presence of one or more types of encoding and annotations
                  is a very important aspect in the possibilities of corpus exploitation .
               To decide which annotation tool to use, an evaluation was made between four
                  current leading annotation tools: Prodigy
                     https://prodi.gy
                  , Doccano
                     https://doccano.herokuapp.com
                  , Brat
                     http://brat.nlplab.org
                   and Tagtog
                     https://www.tagtog.com/
                  . The comparison of their characteristics is shown in Table 1 (general
                  functionalities; whether or not there are user management facilities; whether
                  inter-annotator agreement is automatically calculated; if it is possible to
                  automate tagging; input and output formats; operating system availability;
                  availability of a web version; whether or not Python programming tools need to be
                  installed locally, and finally if is for free, open-source and if user programming
                  skills are required). The Tagtog tool was chosen because it is the only one that
                  integrates a metric for viewing the agreement between annotators. In addition, it
                  allows us to visualize it as it is annotated, which makes the annotation flow much
                  more dynamic.
               
                  Comparison of tagging tools.
                  
                     
                     Prodigy
                     Doccano
                     Brat
                     Tagtog
                  
                  
                     General functionalities
                     tagging text, images and videos and train models with the tagged
                        data
                     text classification, sequence labelling, sequence-to-sequence
                        tasks
                     entity and relationship annotation, lookups and other NLP derived
                        tasks
                     entity and relationship annotation, document classification
                  
                  
                     User management
                     no
                     yes
                     yes
                     yes
                  
                  
                     Metrics for inter-annotator agreement
                     no
                     no
                     no
                     yes
                  
                  
                     Possibility to automate tagging
                     yes
                     no
                     no
                     yes (under subscription)
                  
                  
                     Input formats
                     TXT, JSONL, JSON, CSVand others
                     TXT, JSONL, CoNLL
                     TXT
                     TXT, CSV, source code files, URLs and others
                  
                  
                     Output formats
                     JSONL
                     JSONL
                     .ann
                     TXT, HTML, XML, CSV, ann.json, EntitiesTsv, others
                  
                  
                     Operating system
                     Windows, Mac and Linux
                     Windows, Mac and Linux
                     Mac or Linux (on Windows it is recommended a virtual machine)
                     Windows, Mac and Linux
                  
                  
                     Requires interacting with the command line
                     yes
                     yes
                     yes
                     no (on the web version)
                  
                  
                     Needs Python installed
                     yes (3.6+)
                     yes (3.8+)
                     yes (2.5+)
                     no
                  
                  
                     Programming skills required
                     familiarity with Python is desirable
                     no
                     knowledge of Linux and Apache servers is required
                     no (on the web version)
                  
                  
                     Open source
                     Partially
                     yes
                     yes
                     yes
                  
                  
                     Free
                     no
                     yes
                     yes
                     yes (different subscriptions)
                  
               
               The process of the manual annotation of a corpus involves the construction of an
                     annotation guideline in which the types of labels/tags are defined and
                  specifications are given on what to annotate and what not to annotate, from where
                  and to where to annotate, etc (; ). Achieving a high annotation agreement
                  enables the number of annotators in the future to be increased.
               The process also includes the definition of the set of labels, that were defined
                  together with art historians in several turns. On the one hand, the art historians
                  know the information they need, but they do not have the perspective of the
                  computer scientist who knows what kind of categories the model is able to learn to
                  generalise. It is therefore a delicate task that requires an effort of
                  understanding on both sides. When deciding on the set of labels, these can
                  describe broad categories, such as persons, places, organisations, etc, or finer
                  categories, such as streets and squares within the place category or nobles and
                  lords within the person category. It is more convenient to start with a finer or
                  more granular set of labels, as converting these categories into their
                  corresponding broad versions is simpler than carrying out the reverse
                  operation.
               Based on the dialogue with the art historians and the documents they provided us
                  with, a first proposal of taxonomy of entities was drawn up. It contained a wide
                  set of entities and sub-entities (such as different kinds of religious places or
                  houses) that is expected to be reduced in order to increase the quality of the
                  automatic annotation. These entities are dumped into the annotation tool and the
                  first annotation cycle was carried out.
               
                  Inter-Annotator Agreement for Person entity class automatically calculated
                     by the tool.
                  Table showing rates of agreement between entites by percentage.
                  
               
               The first sub-corpus contains five newspapers with 28 pages, 928 sentences and
                  15,145 tokens, which are annotated by four annotators using a blind annotation
                  process, that is, each person annotates the document independently without
                  consulting the others, following the guidelines. The tool then calculates the
                  Inter-Annotator Agreement (IAA) for each entity (see Figure 2). With these
                  metrics, the quality of the labels is re-evaluated, and the taxonomy is adjusted.
                  In the second round the tag taxonomy is as shown in Figure 3.
               
                  Taxonomy of entities.
                  Flowchart showing the organization of entities, e.g. Schools and
                        Hospitals both become part of the larger entity
                     Places.
                  
               
               Figure 4 shows an annotated text using the Tagtog tool that shares the colour
                  legend classes shown at Figure 3: iglesia de san Luis
                  is a (multiword) entity denoting a religious building; actores, coristas, bailarines are professions.
               
                  Tagtog tool: hardcopy of a manually annotated text (left) and an excerpt
                     codified in the IOB format (right).
                  A text sample with words and phrases tagged in many colors on the left,
                     juxtaposed with a table of tagged words and their corresponding categories on
                     the right.
                  
               
               Finally, once all the occurrences in the sub-corpus of historical newspapers are
                  manually annotated/tagged, the Tagtog tool provides different export formats,
                  including ann.json. After, the annotations output is converted into the IOB format
                  in order to train the machine learning models (as described in the next section).
                  To obtain the documents in IOB format, a new script is designed to transform the
                  Tagtog EntitiesTsv output format into IOB format. At this moment the development
                  of the deep learning system can start (the so-called DM model).
            
         

            3. Towards an automatic annotation model for CLARA-DM
            Once we have some CLARA-DM manually annotated (previously transcribed) newspapers
               (sub-corpus), some experiments to perform a NER task automatically reusing or
               transforming into a new one previously developed models in similar annotation
               settings can be carried out. The question is whether we can use one of the existing
               NER models or not, and how. 
            A brief explanation of the methodology and terminology of the experiments is as
               follows:
            
               First, we experiment with the HIPE2020 dataset (notice that we can use the
                  terms corpus or dataset interchangeably, although the latter has a more
                  computational nuance). We seek to evaluate the performance of monolingual and
                  multilingual models (being the latter larger and trained in several languages),
                  and to see if knowledge transfers between languages, through monolingual and/or
                  multilingual models in a fine-tuning setup. Then we look at knowledge transfer
                  between tasks, that is, we evaluate whether it is beneficial for a different task
                  to use models trained with datasets for the general NER task (and therefore have
                  different labels than HIPE2020).
               In a similar approach, we then experiment with the CLARA-DM dataset. First, we
                  carry out some experiments without training the selected models (zero-shot
                  experiments)we carry out some zero-shot experiments, that is, we evaluate on
                  CLARA-DM dataset some models trained for general tags in a NER task or for NER on
                  historical newspapers, and compare which setup achieves better results. After
                  that, we train models with the CLARA-DM dataset and see if adding more historical
                  training data improves the results. We include a preliminary qualitative error
                  analysis on the results obtained for this first evaluation step based on HIPE2020
                  and CLARA-DM datasets.
               Then we carry out a second evaluation step, in which we evaluate several
                  aspects. The first one is to study whether the method of adjudication for the
                  final version of the manually annotated documents plays a role in the performance
                  of the models (that is, when there are several annotators, there are different
                  versions of the annotations and it is necessary to decide which label is the final
                  one). The second one is a measurement of the performance based on the development
                  of the annotation guideline versions, that is, the way in which the documents are
                  annotated, and the availability of more documents annotated with the latest
                  guidelines to see the gain in performance.
            
            All the previous steps imply the selection of different available DL models to decide
               justifiably if we have to develop our own model, as we did for transcription.
            The models used for the experiments are based on RoBERTa (monolingual)  and XLM-RoBERTa
                  https://huggingface.co/xlm-roberta-base
                (multilingual) . Among the monolingual
               models we experiment with:
            
               two Spanish: RoBERTa-BNE
                     https://huggingface.co/PlanTL-GOB-ES/roberta-base-bne
                   from the MarIA project  and BERTin-RoBERTa
                     https://huggingface.co/bertin-project/bertin-roberta-base-spanish
                   from the BERTin project ,
               one English: DistilRoBERTa
                     https://huggingface.co/distilroberta-base
                  
                  ,
               one French: DistilCamemBERT
                     https://huggingface.co/cmarkea/distilcamembert-base
                  
                   and
               one German: GottBERT
                     https://huggingface.co/uklfr/gottbert-base
                  
                  .
            
            On the other hand, we use models that have been trained for a general set of NER
               tags:
            
               one monolingual for Spanish: RoBERTa-BNE-NER-CAPITEL
                     https://huggingface.co/PlanTL-GOB-ES/roberta-base-bne-capitel-ner
                  ,
               and two multilingual ones, one for Spanish (XLM-RoBERTa-NER-Spanish
                     https://huggingface.co/MMG/xlm-roberta-large-ner-spanish
                  ) and another one trained in 10 languages with high resources (XLM-RoBERTa-NER-HRL
                     https://huggingface.co/Davlan/xlm-roberta-base-ner-hrl
                  ).
            
            The working environment is a Google Colaboratory notebook, which provides a NVIDIA
               Tesla T4 GPU with 16GB of RAM and CUDA version 11.2. In addition, Transformers
               4.11.3, Datasets 1.16.1, HuggingFace Tokenizers 0.10.3 and Pytorch 1.12.1+cu113
               libraries are installed for running the experiments.
            In the following sub-sections the subsequent experiments and related analysis of the
               results are described:
            1) Using the HIPE2020 dataset, that contains different multilingual sub-corpus and
               entities annotated with specific tags, different from the general ones. Two different
               strategies are studied. The first one is the fine-tuning to observe both whether the
               monolingual training in French and German transfers to English, and if the
               multilingual model trained only with French or German improves in other languages not
               trained with. The second one is the evaluation of the transfer of knowledge from
               models using general tags to models with a different set of tags.
            2) As the CLARA-DM dataset uses its specific set of tags, different from the HIPE2020
               ones, two strategies are used for the first set of experiments: on the one hand, the
               use of models trained with external NER datasets (generalist or specific) on a
               zero-shot setup, and on the other hand, training with the CLARA-DM labelled data on a
               few-shot learning set-up. Some experiments use the CAPITEL dataset
                  https://sites.google.com/view/capitel2020
                from IberLEF2020 (the task is a general NER for Spanish).
            3) After the discussion and conclusions on the first evaluation step, a new step for
               experiments is planned in order to evaluate (a) the method of adjudicating the final
               version of the manually annotated newspapers, (b) different aspects of the annotation
               guidelines (the way of annotating the classes and the total amount of tags), and (c)
               the amount of training data.
            
               3.1. Experiments with HIPE2020
               The HIPE2020 (Identifying Historical People, Places and other
                     Entities) competitive event held at the CLEF conference, shares several
                  objectives with the work presented as it focuses on the evaluation of NLP,
                  information extraction and information retrieval systems. The HIPE2020 corpus  made available for experimentation in this
                  competition is a collection of digitized historical documents in three languages:
                  English, French and German. The documents come from the archives of different
                  Swiss, Luxembourg and American newspapers. The dataset was annotated following the
                  HIPE annotation guidelines , which in turn was
                  derived from the Quaero annotation guidelines . The corpus uses the IOB format,
                  providing training, test and validation sets for French and German, and no
                  training corpus for English. The goal was to gain new insights and prospectives
                  into the transferability of entity recognition approaches across languages, time
                  periods, document types, and annotation tag sets.
               The HIPE2020 corpus is annotated with the labels of Person, Place, Organization,
                  Time, and Human Production. It contains 185 German documents totalling 149,856
                  tokens, 126 English documents totalling 45,695 tokens, and 244 French documents
                  with 245,026 tokens. In total, they make up a corpus of 555 documents and 440,577
                  tokens. The dataset is pre-processed to recover the phrases that make up the
                  documents and to be able to pass them to the models together with the labels,
                  obtaining a total of 7,887 phrases in French (of which 5,334 correspond to the
                  training -166,217 tokens-, 1,186 to validation and 1,367 to test), 5,462 sentences
                  in German (of which 3,185 correspond to training -86,444 tokens-, 1,136 to
                  validation and 1,141 to test), and 1,437 sentences in English (938 in validation
                  and 499 in test). Note that the French training set is considerably larger than
                  the German training set.
               
                  3.1.1. Fine-tuning
                  The first experiments consist of fine-tuning on the HIPE2020 dataset. When
                     training a machine learning model there are several hyperparameters to be
                     configured. The number of epochs is the number of times that the
                     algorithm is going through the whole training dataset. The batch size is
                     the number of training examples (in this case, sentences) used in one
                     iteration. And the learning rate determines the pace at which an
                     algorithm updates or learns the values of the parameters. The models’
                     hyperparameters are configured for a training in 3 epochs and a batch size of
                     12 in both the training and validation set, and a 5e-5 learning rate. The rest
                     of the model configuration is set by default using the AutoConfig, AutoModel
                     and AutoTokenizer classes of the Huggingface Transformers library. First, we
                     fine-tune three monolingual models, which are shown in the first three rows of
                     Table 2, and then the multilingual model, whose results are shown in the last
                     three rows. In both cases we train first with the French dataset, then with the
                     German dataset, and thirdly with French and German jointly, since the English
                     sub-corpus has no training dataset.
                  The evaluation metrics are based on precision, recall and F1. Briefly
                     explained, precision is the relationship (fraction) of relevant instances among
                     the retrieved instances, whilst recall is the fraction of relevant instances
                     that were retrieved. The F1 measure is the harmonic mean of the precision and
                     recall.
                  The objective of the first experiment is to analyse whether the knowledge
                     learned on the NER training with the historical texts in French and German
                     transfers to English. Secondly, whether the multilingual training with one
                     language improves the performance in the other languages. We find that both
                     claims hold true. The performance annotating the English sub-corpus of a model
                     trained jointly in French and German improves compared to the performance of
                     the models trained only with French or German (both when using the monolingual
                     English model and the multilingual model) as shown with the results in the
                     third row, that are better than the ones in the first and second rows, as well
                     as the results in the sixth row, that are better than those in the fourth and
                     fifth ones. Also, when training the multilingual model only with French or
                     German, the result improves in the languages in which it has not been trained.
                     For example, when training DistilCamemBERT with the French sub-corpus, the F1
                     in the German sub-corpus is 0.19, whilst when training XLM-RoBERTa with French,
                     the F1 in German is 0.63.
                  Moreover, it is noteworthy that the multilingual model manages to equal or even
                     improve the results of the monolingual models.
                  
                     Experiments with monolingual and multilingual models on French, German
                        and English HIPE2020 datasets.
                     
                        
                        
                        FR
                        
                        DE
                        
                        EN
                     
                     
                        
                        P
                        R
                        F1
                        
                        P
                        R
                        F1
                        
                        P
                        R
                     
                     
                        DistilCamemBERT-fr
                        
                        0.74
                        0.8
                        0.77
                        
                        0.13
                        0.36
                        0.19
                        
                        0.38
                        0.56
                     
                     
                        GottBERT-de
                        
                        0.28
                        0.38
                        0.32
                        
                        0.69
                        0.75
                        0.72
                        
                        0.4
                        0.52
                     
                     
                        DistilRoBERTa-fr+de
                        
                        0.66
                        0.75
                        0.7
                        
                        0.56
                        0.63
                        0.59
                        
                        0.4
                        0.6
                     
                     
                        XLM-R-fr
                        
                        0.76
                        0.8
                        0.78
                        
                        0.56
                        0.72
                        0.63
                        
                        0.53
                        0.61
                     
                     
                        XLM-R-de
                        
                        0.61
                        0.68
                        0.65
                        
                        0.69
                        0.75
                        0.72
                        
                        0.46
                        0.54
                     
                     
                        XLM-R-fr+de
                        
                        0.76
                        0.8
                        0.78
                        
                        0.75
                        0.76
                        0.76
                        
                        0.59
                        0.62
                     
                  
               
               
                  3.1.2. Transfer of knowledge with general NER datasets
                  In view of the usefulness of the multilingual model in the previous results, in
                     the following experiments we use the multilingual model trained for NER in 10
                     languages with high resources.
                  
                     Evaluation on HIPE2020 of the model XLM-RoBERTa trained on 10 high
                        resource languages for NER
                     
                        
                        
                        FR
                        
                        DE
                        
                        EN
                     
                     
                        
                        P
                        R
                        F1
                        
                        P
                        R
                        F1
                        
                        P
                        R
                     
                     
                        XLM-R-ner-hrl
                        
                        0.4
                        0.6
                        0.56
                        
                        0.53
                        0.56
                        0.54
                        
                        0.46
                        0.54
                     
                     
                        XLM-R-ner-hrl-fr
                        
                        0.77
                        0.82
                        0.79
                        
                        0.67
                        0.7
                        0.68
                        
                        0.56
                        0.63
                     
                     
                        XLM-R-ner-hrl-de
                        
                        0.71
                        0.73
                        0.72
                        
                        0.73
                        0.77
                        0.75
                        
                        0.64
                        0.57
                     
                     
                        XLM-R-ner-hrl-fr+de
                        
                        0.78
                        0.68
                        0.8
                        
                        0.76
                        0.8
                        0.78
                        
                        0.6
                        0.68
                     
                  
                  The model is first evaluated on HIPE2020 without training (the so-called
                     zero-shot learning), which is shown in the first row of the table. Then the
                     model is trained with the HIPE2020 datasets, first French, then German and
                     finally with both. Briefly, the zero-shot transfer learning means that we are
                     taking a model trained for a specific or general task, and directly applying it
                     on a different task or dataset for which the model has not been trained.
                  The results are slightly better than those obtained in the previous
                     experiments, but in return we are evaluating on a general set of labels
                     (Person, Location, Organization, and Dates), different from the one that
                     HIPE2020 uses.
               
            
            
               3.2. Experiments with CLARA-DM
               With the insights we have extracted from the results of previous experiments, we
                  move on to carrying out experiments with our developed dataset. To carry out these
                  experiments we have the manually annotated sub-corpus of 5 newspapers, which have
                  been obtained from the annotations of between 3 and 4 annotators and merged using
                  the majority vote method. After a pre-processing phase carried out using the spaCy
                     https://spacy.io
                   package to delimit the sentences that make up the newspapers, a dataset of
                  928 sentences is obtained, with a total of 15,145 tokens. The annotation
                  guidelines were in a preliminary version, and the inter-annotator agreement was
                  still to be improved. Therefore, at this point we tackle different
                  experiments.
               The CLARA-DM dataset has a large and original set of labels. This implies that, in
                  order to obtain a specific NER model for the dataset, it will be necessary to have
                  enough training data. We will adopt two strategies to carry out the first
                  experiments, on the one hand, making use of models trained with external NER
                  datasets (generalist or specific), and on the other hand, training with the
                  available labelled data.
               The set of labels of the dataset is extensive: it includes the generic labels of
                  person, place, establishment, profession, ornaments, furniture, sales and losses
                  or findings, and also the sub-labels person_lords (for nobles, high officials,
                  etc), place_address (for streets, squares, gateways), place_religious (convents,
                  parishes), place_hospital, place_college and place_fountain. In total, they make
                  up a set of 14 tags, which when duplicated in the IOB format and together with the
                  empty tag O, add up to a total of 29 tags. This increases the complexity
                  for the models to learn, and therefore the need for sufficient training data. On
                  the other hand, in order to apply zero-shot learning, the names of the labels must
                  be changed and simplified so that they are the same as those of the training
                  datasets of the models, thus losing the more specific labels (such as religious
                  places, ornaments or objects for sale) and drastically reducing the size of the
                  set of labels, with the loss of information and efforts made during the labelling
                  process that this entails.
               
                  Label distribution in CLARA-DM.
                  
                     PER
                     SEÑOR
                     LOC
                     RELIG
                     DIREC
                     COLE
                     HOSP
                     PROF
                     ESTABLEC
                     VENTA
                     PÉRDIDA
                     ADOR
                     Total
                  
                  
                     347
                     49
                     78
                     28
                     112
                     1
                     2
                     89
                     81
                     32
                     14
                     4
                     837
                  
               
               The distribution of the tags in these documents is shown in Table 4. The class
                  with by far the most examples is person, followed by address, profession,
                  establishment, place, and lords. The classes of religious places, losses, schools,
                  hospitals, and ornaments are notably underrepresented, and those of fountains and
                  furniture do not even appear in the dataset (because they might not have been
                  annotated by at least two people and therefore do not appear in the final
                  version).
               In the following we describe the experiments carried out to study the benefits of
                  the transfer of knowledge between tasks and languages on our CLARA-DM dataset.
               
                  3.2.1. Zero-shot using CLARA-DM as test set
                  In these first two experiments we are not training with CLARA-DM but using it
                     as a test set. This means that we are not evaluating on the set of labels of
                     CLARA-DM but on the ones of the datasets that the models have been trained on.
                     In Table 5 we evaluate two models trained for NER in Spanish, one multilingual
                     and one monolingual. In Table 6, models trained with HIPE2020 (specific labels
                     in historical newspapers) or with the CAPITEL dataset from IberLEF2020 (general
                     NER for Spanish) are evaluated in CLARA-DM.
                  
                     Evaluation on CLARA-DM of general NER models for Spanish.
                     
                        
                        P
                        R
                        F1
                     
                     
                        XLM-R-ner-spanish
                        0.39
                        0.48
                        0.43
                     
                     
                        RoBERTa-bne-ner-capitel
                        0.43
                        0.53
                        0.48
                     
                  
                  
                     Evaluation on CLARA-DM with models trained with HIPE2020.
                     
                        
                        P
                        R
                        F1
                     
                     
                        XLM-R-fr
                        0.43
                        0.54
                        0.48
                     
                     
                        XLM-R-fr-de
                        0.44
                        0.49
                        0.46
                     
                     
                        XLM-R-fr-de-en
                        0.46
                        0.51
                        0.48
                     
                     
                        RoBERTa-bne-fr
                        0.47
                        0.56
                        0.51
                     
                     
                        RoBERTa-bne-new-capitel-fr
                        0.46
                        0.47
                        0.46
                     
                     
                        BERTin-fr
                        0.42
                        0.6
                        0.5
                     
                  
                  We find that in both cases the monolingual models are slightly better. In the
                     case of training with HIPE2020, it turns out to be more beneficial to train
                     only with French, than to add English and German, since it is the most similar
                     language to Spanish. Moreover, it is better to train with the French sub-corpus
                     of HIPE2020, that tackles the same task (NER in historical newspapers), than
                     training with CAPITEL, which tackles general NER for Spanish, so the task
                     influences the model.
               
               
                  3.2.2. Few-shot/fine-tuning on CLARA-DM
                  In these experiments we train with the few data we have manually annotated
                     (that is why the experiments are few-shot learning and not zero-shot learning)
                     using 3 newspapers as training, 1 as validation and 1 as test (containing
                     approximately 700 sentences for training, 120 for validation and 110 for test).
                     On Table 7 the results of fine-tuning several models are shown, the best one
                     being the Spanish monolingual BERTin model.
                  
                     Fine-tuning on CLARA-DM.
                     
                        
                        P
                        R
                        F1
                     
                     
                        XLM-R-clara
                        0.41
                        0.52
                        0.46
                     
                     
                        RoBERTa-bne-clara
                        0.42
                        0.50
                        0.46
                     
                     
                        BERTin-R-clara
                        0.48
                        0.58
                        0.52
                     
                  
                  Even if we consider the corpus very small in comparison with the HIPE2020 one,
                     (700 sentences versus 7,900 in the French sub-corpus) it turns out that with
                     only 3 newspapers for training, similar results are achieved to those of
                     directly evaluating the models trained with HIPE2020 shown in Table 6.
                  
                  
                     Training and evaluation in CLARA-DM of models trained with HIPE2020 and
                        CAPITEL.
                     
                        
                        P
                        R
                        F1
                     
                     
                        XLM-R-fr-clara
                        0.59
                        0.64
                        0.61
                     
                     
                        RoBERTa-bne-fr-clara
                        0.53
                        0.61
                        0.57
                     
                     
                        RoBERTa-bne-ner-capitel-clara
                        0.54
                        0.59
                        0.57
                     
                     
                        RoBERTa-bne-ner-capitel-fr-clara
                        0.55
                        0.57
                        0.56
                     
                     
                        BERTin-R-fr-clara
                        0.54
                        0.68
                        0.6
                     
                  
                  Lastly, in Table 8 the training with CLARA-DM has been combined with training
                     with HIPE2020 (only the French part) and CAPITEL. Again, we have obtained the
                     best results of all experiments until now, but at the cost of evaluating on a
                     different set of labels than that of CLARA-DM and therefore wasting the
                     annotation effort.
                  This is the only case in which the performance of monolingual and multilingual
                     models are very similar. Here it is interesting to note that, again, it gives
                     better results to train with the French HIPE2020, which contains historical
                     newspapers, than with CAPITEL, which is Spanish for generic NER in general
                     domains. CAPITEL
                        https://plantl.mineco.gob.es/tecnologias-lenguaje/comunicacion-formacion/eventos/eventosinfoday2019/Aspectos%20destacados%20del%20Plan%20TL/corpus-anotado-Jordi-Porta.pdf
                     contains texts after 2005 on the following topics: Science and technology;
                     Social sciences, beliefs and thought; Politics, economy and justice; Arts
                     culture and shows; Current affairs, leisure and daily life; Health and
                     Others.
                  At this point, it is worth noting that the labels that each model had in its
                     (first) training in each experiment are as follows:
                  
                     in Table 5, the tags for the experiment XLM-R-ner-spanish are general
                        person, location, organization, and miscellaneous, and those of the
                        experiment RoBERTa-bne-ner-capitel are those of CAPITEL, that is person,
                        location, organization and others (in BIOES format instead of BIO),
                     in Table 6 all the experiments have the labels of HIPE2020, except for
                        RoBERTa-bne-ner-capitel-fr, which has those of CAPITEL,
                     in Table 7 the labels are those of CLARA-DM and
                     in Table 8 the labels are those of HIPE2020 or CAPITEL, whichever comes
                        first.
                  
                  Since we have seen that models trained with a different set of labels (HIPE2020
                     or CAPITEL ones) are able to predict with some quality the labels that they
                     have in common with the CLARA-DM dataset, we can do the opposite experiment. In
                     order not to lose the wide range of labels in CLARA-DM, we can first train the
                     models adding fictitious tags, so that in the second training with CLARA-DM we
                     include all the classes.
                  For example, regarding the XLM-RoBERTa model: when fine-tuning it first with
                     French HIPE2020 and after with CLARA-DM, we obtained metrics of around 60%
                     (first row of Table 8), but we were evaluating only on the tags Person, Place
                     and Organization, which are the ones HIPE2020 has in common with the CLARA-DM
                     corpus. If we change the classes in the first training with HIPE2020 by adding
                     the ones present in CLARA-DM, and fine-tune first with HIPE2020 and then with
                     CLARA-DM, we get the metrics shown in Table 9. Performance drops by 14% on
                     average, but in return we are evaluating the corpus on the whole CLARA-DM
                     tagset, with a model trained with both CLARA-DM and HIPE2020.
                  
                     Evaluation on CLARA-DM of a model trained first with HIPE and then with
                        CLARA-DM, with the tags of CLARA-DM corpus.
                     
                        
                        P
                        R
                        F1
                     
                     
                        XLM-R-fr-clara
                        0.44
                        0.51
                        0.47
                     
                  
                  Comparing this performance with that obtained when only training with CLARA-DM
                     (Table 7) (since here we are training with both HIPE2020 and CLARA-DM), the
                     results are quite similar, so apparently there is no real added value when
                     adding the first training with HIPE2020, that is, using more resources.
               
               
                  3.2.3. Qualitative analysis
                  As a preliminary qualitative analysis, or error analysis, Table 10 shows the
                     performance per label of the best model fine-tuned with CLARA-DM, which was
                     BERTin (Table 7).
                  It is interesting to note that the results are consistent with the current
                     state of the annotation guidelines, since entities such as persons, locations
                     and religious places have a high degree of inter-annotator agreement, above
                     70%, being those that obtain the best metrics, while others such as
                     establishments or objects for sale still need to be revised through the
                     guideline and the model also has a harder time identifying them correctly. This
                     seems to be even more relevant than the inner imbalance of the dataset, since
                     classes such as religious places do not have many appearances or occurrences,
                     but the model recognises them with a high degree of accuracy.
                  
                     Metrics of each label with BERTin model fine-tuned on CLARA-DM.
                     
                        
                        
                        P
                        R
                        F1
                        support
                     
                     
                        Establishment
                        establec
                        0.23
                        0.31
                        0.26
                        29
                     
                     
                        Place or Location
                        loc
                        0.79
                        0.71
                        0.75
                        21
                     
                     
                        Place - College
                        loc_cole
                        0.00
                        0.00
                        0.00
                        1
                     
                     
                        Place - Address
                        loc_direc
                        0.42
                        0.78
                        0.55
                        23
                     
                     
                        Place - Religious
                        loc_relig
                        0.80
                        0.67
                        0.73
                        6
                     
                     
                        Losses or Findings
                        perdida_hallazgo
                        0.00
                        0.00
                        0.00
                        0
                     
                     
                        Person
                        pers
                        0.53
                        1.00
                        0.70
                        8
                     
                     
                        Person - Lords
                        pers_señores
                        0.56
                        0.64
                        0.60
                        14
                     
                     
                        Trades and Professions
                        prof
                        0.61
                        0.67
                        0.64
                        21
                     
                     
                        Sales
                        venta
                        0.50
                        0.08
                        0.14
                        12
                     
                     
                         
                        Micro avg
                        0.48
                        0.58
                        0.52
                        135
                     
                     
                        
                        Macro avg
                        0.44
                        0.49
                        0.44
                        135
                     
                     
                        
                        Weighted avg
                        0.51
                        0.58
                        0.51
                        135
                     
                  
               
            
            
               3.3. First evaluation step discussion
               In the experiments with HIPE2020 we have observed that the use of multilingual
                  models is beneficial when we have datasets in several languages for the NER task,
                  as they allow the knowledge to be transferred to languages with fewer or no
                  resources. Furthermore, we have seen that including domain-generic datasets
                  slightly improves the results, but at the cost of evaluating on a different set of
                  labels, and therefore wasting the efforts of the tagging procedure.
               In spite of not having a particularly robust or sophisticated model, and although
                  very precise results were not one main goal of the work, results of around 80% on
                  the F1 measure for French and German, and 65% for English, which has no training
                  data, have been achieved (previous Section 3.1).
               As regards the experiments with CLARA-DM, in general, better results have been
                  obtained with the monolingual models in Spanish, except when we have trained
                  jointly with CLARA-DM and HIPE2020 datasets, in which the multilingual model has
                  been on a par with the monolingual ones. It has also been shown that the
                  similarity between Spanish and French favours the transfer of knowledge within the
                  same domain, and that this transfer is even better than training with a generic
                  NER dataset in the same language.
               An important conclusion for corpora of languages or domains with scarce resources
                  has also been initially contrasted: the importance of the inter-annotator
                  agreement over the dataset imbalance.
               In addition, as with three annotated newspapers, the results of fine-tuning with
                  CLARA-DM achieve similar results than evaluating in CLARA-DM a model trained on
                  HIPE2020, even if, the joint training with HIPE2020 and CLARA-DM has not given
                  rise to a great improvement in results. That is shown in Table 6 (zero-shot) were
                  models trained with HIPE2020 are evaluated in CLARA-DM with results of around 50%
                  F1, while in Table 7 (fine-tuning in CLARA-DM) a 50% F1 is also achieved just by
                  training with only 3 newspapers. So, it is for sure that with more annotated
                  documents, good results can be expected.
               The results are susceptible to improvement, since the quality of the annotation
                  guidelines is still to be enhanced, and so the inter-annotator agreement, which
                  will lead to have more quality and homogeneous data.
               From this analysis, the plan for the second evaluation step is to try to improve
                  the models obtained in this first evaluation step, and to measure the gain in
                  performance, once we have more robust annotation guidelines, and more annotated
                  newspapers. As will be described in the next section, the experiments are based on
                  the three models used for fine-tuning in CLARA-DM (Table 7) since it has been
                  shown that training with more added datasets is not so beneficial, but it is
                  better to have more data in CLARA-DM.
            
            
               3.4. Second evaluation step
               In order to confirm the previous results, in this series of experiments the
                  following parameters are evaluated: the method of adjudicating the final version
                  of the manually annotated newspapers, aspects of the annotation guidelines (the
                  way of annotating the classes and the total amount of tags), and the amount of
                  training data.
               In Tagtog, when several users annotate the same document, as a result, there are
                  different annotation versions. Adjudication is the process of resolving
                  inconsistencies between these versions before promoting a version to master (final
                  version). In other words, the different annotators’ versions are merged into one,
                  (using various strategies). Adjudication can either be manual (when a reviewer
                  promotes a version to master) or automatic
                     https://docs.tagtog.com/collaboration.html#automatic-adjudication
                  , based on different adjudication methods such as the IAA (or Best
                  Annotators) or the Majority Vote. Automatic adjudication based on Best Annotators
                  means that for each single annotation task, the annotations of the user with the
                  best IAA are promoted to master. The goal is to have the best annotations
                  available for each annotation task in master version. Furthermore, automatic
                  adjudication by Majority Vote means that for each single annotation, it is
                  promoted to master only if it was annotated by over 50% of the annotators.
               First, an experiment is carried out with the same documents as before but obtained
                  with a different adjudication method. While in the first experiments the final
                  version was obtained by the Majority Vote method, in this case the Best Annotators
                  method is used.
               Then, the progress of the annotation guidelines is evaluated, as well as the gain
                  in performance with a bigger number of annotated newspapers.
               In these experiments we will limit ourselves to carrying out experiments
                  exclusively with the CLARA-DM dataset (not HIPE2020, CAPITEL, etc) and with the
                  models used in the previous few-shot experiments. The newspapers to be used will
                  be those of the first experiments and also new annotated newspapers.
               
                  3.4.1. Evaluation of the adjudication method
                  By carrying out the experiments in Table 7, that is, fine-tuning with CLARA-DM,
                     but instead with the final annotations obtained by the Best Annotators method,
                     we get the results shown in Table 11.
                  
                     Fine-tuning with CLARA-DM (the same experiments as in Table 7), but with
                        final version of the annotations obtained with the Best Annotators
                        method.
                     
                        
                        P
                        R
                        F1
                     
                     
                        XLM-R-clara
                        0.47
                        0.53
                        0.50
                     
                     
                        RoBERTa-bne-clara
                        0.49
                        0.55
                        0.52
                     
                     
                        BERTin-R-clara
                        0.37
                        0.47
                        0.41
                     
                  
                  With RoBERTa-BNE model the F1 measure improves from 0.46 to 0.52, accuracy from
                     0.42 to 0.49, and recall from 0.50 to 0.55. And with XLM-RoBERTa, the F1
                     measure improves from 0.46 to 0.5, precision from 0.41 to 0.47 and recall from
                     0.52 to 0.53. However, with the BERTin model, which achieved the best results
                     in Table 7, the F1 measure has decreased from 0.52 to 0.41, accuracy from 0.48
                     to 0.37, and recall from 0.58 to 0.47.
                  That is, by changing the adjudication method, the best performing method has
                     changed, even though the F1 measure of 0.52 is still not surpassed.
               
               
                  3.4.2. Progress of annotation guidelines and availability of more training
                     data
                  The annotation guidelines are adjusted in several turns, by analysing both the
                     Inter Annotator Agreement and the performance of the models.
                  Eleven new newspapers were annotated in accordance with the new guidelines. In
                     particular, the place_fountains entity is deleted, since we consider it from
                     now on included within the furniture. Also, place_college and place_hospital
                     tags are deleted (and included in establishments), since the three entities had
                     very few mentions in the newspapers. Finally, the category Organization
                     (administrative bodies) is created, to differentiate it from that of
                     Establishments (commerce, leisure, services and others) and to be in line with
                     other common annotation guidelines.
                  All in all, we get a set of 12 classes: two for people (person_general,
                     person_lord) three for places (place_general, place_address, place_religious),
                     establishments, organizations, professions, and four for objects (ornaments,
                     furniture, sales, losses/findings), having the taxonomy shown in Figure 5.
                  
                     Final label taxonomy for CLARA-DM.
                     Flowchart showing label taxonomy for the 12 classes.
                     
                  
                  In intermediate steps, some different ways of labelling were evaluated. For
                     example, at some point we agreed to annotate the profession of a person within
                     the person tag whenever they appeared contiguously (as in Sr. D. Josef de la Cruz y Loyola, Gobernador de dicho Real
                        Sitio). However, this proves ambiguous, and we confirm that is it
                     better to label more concrete and nuclear entities, since it is clearer for
                     annotators, and thus improves the IAA, and in turn leads to better performance
                     of the models on the classes with better IAA.
                  The results of fine-tuning the models with the 11 new annotated newspapers,
                     annotated with the final guidelines and the final version obtained with the
                     Best Annotators method, are shown in Table 12. In this case we used 7
                     newspapers for training, that contained 1,228 sentences, which nearly doubles
                     the number of sentences that we had for the first experiments.
                  
                     Training and evaluation in CLARA-DM with more newspapers and new
                        guidelines.
                     
                        
                        P
                        R
                        F1
                     
                     
                        XLM-RoBERTa-clara
                        0.74
                        0.79
                        0.76
                     
                     
                        RoBERTa-bne-clara
                        0.75
                        0.80
                        0.78
                     
                     
                        BERTin-R-clara
                        0.75
                        0.77
                        0.76
                     
                  
                  While the results of the first fine-tuning had a performance of around 50% in
                     all the metrics (Table 7), with the updated annotation guidelines and double
                     the number of sentences for the training, metrics of more than 75% have been
                     achieved. It is also observed that when the IAA improves for a specific class,
                     so the models get to predict it better, even when there are fewer examples of
                     the class.
                  
                     Metrics of each label with RoBERTa-BNE.
                     
                        
                        
                        P
                        R
                        F1
                        support
                     
                     
                        Places or Locations
                        loc
                        0.89
                        0.84
                        0.87
                        50
                     
                     
                        Places — Streets and Squares
                        loc_direc
                        0.82
                        0.94
                        0.87
                        111
                     
                     
                        Places – Religious Buildings
                        loc_relig
                        0.64
                        0.62
                        0.63
                        26
                     
                     
                        Organizations, Institutions
                        org_adm
                        0.53
                        0.63
                        0.58
                        27
                     
                     
                        Establishments
                        org_establec
                        0.67
                        0.60
                        0.63
                        50
                     
                     
                        Persons
                        pers
                        0.81
                        1.00
                        0.89
                        216
                     
                     
                        Persons - Lords
                        pers_señores
                        0.58
                        0.40
                        0.47
                        55
                     
                     
                        Ornaments
                        prod_ador
                        0.80
                        0.57
                        0.67
                        7
                     
                     
                        Furniture
                        prod_mobil
                        0.00
                        0.00
                        0.00
                        1
                     
                     
                        Losses or Findings
                        prod_perdida-hallazgo
                        0.82
                        0.75
                        0.78
                        12
                     
                     
                        Sales
                        prod_venta
                        0.62
                        0.57
                        0.59
                        14
                     
                     
                        Trades and professions
                        prof
                        0.66
                        0.67
                        0.66
                        78
                     
                     
                         
                        Micro avg
                        0.75
                        0.80
                        0.78
                        647
                     
                     
                        
                        Macro avg
                        0.65
                        0.63
                        0.64
                        647
                     
                     
                        
                        Weighted avg
                        0.74
                        0.80
                        0.77
                        647
                     
                  
                  If we take a look at the performance per entity class as in Table 13, one
                     noticeable aspect is that entities that do not contain proper names are usually
                     harder to predict, such as products or professions. We might consider tagging
                     these making use of predefined lists instead of the NER model. Furthermore,
                     sometimes there are very few occurrences of these classes (such is the case of
                     the furniture in Table 13) and this affects the performance as a whole.
                  On the other hand, the results are also very conditioned by the choice of
                     training and test data, since we do not yet have enough examples. Even so, it
                     is shown that both stronger annotation guidelines and the availability of more
                     documents improves the performance of the models.
               
            
         

            4. Proposed methodology
            As a summary of the methodology used in this work, the following is a list of the
               necessary steps necessary to carry out a process of recognition of named entities in
               historical documents.As a summary of the methodology used in this work, the steps
               followed are listed below.
            
               Digitization: The first step is to digitize the historical
                  documents if they are not already in a digital format. This can be done using
                  scanners or digital cameras. This step has already been carried out by the BNE in
                  this work.
               Optical Character Recognition (OCR): Once the documents
                  have been digitized, OCR software is used to convert the text-based images into
                  machine-encoded text. This stage may involve manual error correction to deal with
                  the inaccuracies of the OCR process, particularly with historical documents that
                  may have faded or smudged ink or unusual typography. As explained in previous
                  sections, we used a layout recognition model and trained our own model in
                  Transkribus to obtain the text.
               Annotation guidelines: The initial stage in training a NER
                  model involves establishing rules for accurate entity identification. It's crucial
                  to explicitly define the types of named entities that the model is expected to
                  recognize.
               Annotation: The entities to be recognized by the NER
                  process are then annotated. This involves marking up the text with tags that
                  indicate the type of entity. This is usually done manually by human annotators,
                  using annotation software.
               Validation: The annotated text is then validated to ensure
                  the accuracy of the entity recognition and annotation processes. This can involve
                  a review by human annotators, or the use of validation software that compares the
                  annotated text to a gold standard or benchmark. In this work, we used Tagtog for
                  annotation and validation.
               Training the model: The final step is to train a named
                  entity recognition model from the annotated and validated text. This involves the
                  separation of the data into a training set, a validation set and a test set. This
                  is followed by the selection of the most appropriate model and finally by training
                  the model several times with different hyperparameters.
               Evaluation: The performance of the NER process should be
                  evaluated using appropriate metrics such as precision, recall, and F1-score. This
                  helps to identify areas for improvement and guide future work.
            
            The methodology employed in this research can be extended to other domains and
               languages, facilitating advancements in various fields. For instance, by leveraging
               multilingual models and adapting them to other languages, similar NER tasks in
               historical newspapers from different countries can be accomplished. Additionally,
               applying the developed annotation guidelines and expanding the dataset to include
               newspapers from diverse regions and time periods would enable the automatic
               annotation and prediction of entities in a broader range of Spanish newspapers, and
               potentially other languages. This adaptability and transferability of the methodology
               make it a valuable resource for historians and researchers working on various textual
               collections beyond historical newspapers, such as ancient manuscripts, legal
               documents, or literary works in different languages. By scaling up the annotated data
               and training the models with more diverse samples, the accuracy and robustness of the
               NER models can be further enhanced, fostering more efficient and accurate analyses in
               the digital humanities and beyond.
         

            5. Conclusions and future work
            The characteristics of digitized newspapers and the research interests of historians
               justify the need to develop the CLARA-DM corpus, a model for transcription, and a
               specific model for named entity recognition in these texts.
            As regards named entity recognition, we have seen that cross-language and
               cross-domain knowledge is transferred not only with multilingual models, but also
               with monolingual ones. On the other hand, having corpora or datasets for the same
               specific task (NER in historical newspapers in this case) in other languages might be
               useful and is even better than having generic datasets in the same language.
            In the developed CLARA-DM dataset, the monolingual models and the use of a dataset of
               historical newspapers in French have stood out because it is a language close to
               Spanish.
            Nevertheless, the use of external datasets could not compete with having more
               annotated data of our own corpus. In the final experiments we found that an
               improvement in the annotation guidelines and an increase in the labelled data
               significantly improves the performance of the models. In addition, it is verified
               that the models are sensitive to choices such as the method of adjudication for the
               final version of the annotations, or the choice of data for training and testing.
            We believe that the entity recognition system can be improved in future research by
               using the Simple Knowledge Organisation System (SKOS) and creating an ontology. Based
               on the trained models, and after reviewing the discovered entities by historians, we
               propose to create a taxonomy. This will be used to improve the identification of new
               mentions in other newspapers. In addition, storing information in an ontology will
               allow more complex queries at run time by reducing the ambiguity of entities. For
               example, having all the mentions of a particular location in a single URI would allow
               you to queringqueryingy all the people who have traded there. 
            In summary, from a collection of newspapers in PDF format it has been possible to
               obtain a model for its transcription, with an accuracy of 99%, and a model for the
               prediction of the entities in the transcribed newspapers, with an accuracy of more
               than 75%. This last result will be improved in the future as we trained the model
               with only 7 newspapers. Furthermore, as we already have better-defined annotation
               guidelines we hope to speed up the annotation process and get an even more robust
               final NER model trained with more data to annotate automatically any other Spanish
               newspaper published in the same period.In conclusion, the methodology employed in
               this research can be extended to other domains and languages, facilitating
               advancements in various fields. For instance, by leveraging multilingual models and
               adapting them to other languages, similar NER tasks in historical newspapers from
               different countries can be accomplished. Additionally, applying the developed
               annotation guidelines and expanding the dataset to include newspapers from diverse
               regions and time periods would enable the automatic annotation and prediction of
               entities in a broader range of Spanish newspapers, and potentially other languages.
               This adaptability and transferability of the methodology make it a valuable resource
               for historians and researchers working on various textual collections beyond
               historical newspapers, such as ancient manuscripts, legal documents, or literary
               works in different languages. By scaling up the annotated data and training the
               models with more diverse samples, the accuracy and robustness of the NER models can
               be further enhanced, fostering more efficient and accurate analyses in the digital
               humanities and beyond.
         

            Acknowledgements
            This work has been supported by the Spanish Government and funded under the CLARA-HD
               project (PID2020-116001RB-C32, https://clara-nlp.uned.es/home/dh/).
            We would like to acknowledge the support of the UNED art history professors Álvaro
               Molina and Alicia Cámara, research directors of the CARCEM
                  https://dimh.hypotheses.org/author/dimh
               project. Finally, warm thanks to Andrés Rodríguez-Francés and Víctor
               Sánchez-Sánchez members for a while of UNED research group NLP&IR > DH.
         

            Appendix: Brief introduction to Deep Learning
            Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the field of study that focuses on the creation of
               computer systems and software capable of performing tasks that require human
               intelligence. This covers areas ranging from speech recognition and computer vision
               capabilities, to complex decision making, machine learning and problem solving.
            There are different approaches within AI, such as rule-based AI, which uses a set of
               predefined instructions and rules to make decisions, and machine learning, which is
               based on algorithms and models that allow machines to learn from examples and
               data.
            Machine learning is a sub-discipline of AI based on the idea of building mathematical
               or statistical models that can learn from data. These models are trained using a
               training data set, where examples are provided with their respective labels or
               expected results. The machine learning algorithm analyses the data and adjusts its
               internal parameters to find patterns and correlations between input features and
               output labels.
            Once the model has been trained, it can be used to make predictions or decisions
               about new data that have not been used during training. The goal of machine learning
               is to generalise the knowledge acquired during training so that it can be applied to
               new and unknown situations.
            There are several types of machine learning, each focusing on different approaches
               and techniques to address specific problems. There are three main types: supervised
               and unsupervised learning, and reinforcement learning.
            In supervised learning, the algorithm is provided with a training data set consisting
               of input examples and the corresponding outputs, and the goal for the algorithm is to
               learn to map the inputs to the correct outputs. In unsupervised learning, the
               algorithm is confronted with a set of unlabelled training data. The objective is to
               find patterns, structures or intrinsic relationships in the data. In reinforcement
               learning, the algorithm interacts with a dynamic environment and receives feedback in
               the form of rewards or punishments based on its actions, and learns through trial and
               error, adjusting its behaviour to maximise rewards over time.
            Deep Learning is a branch of machine learning that relies on artificial neural
               networks to learn and extract high-level representations from complex, unstructured
               data.
            Two essential stages in deep learning are pre-training and training/fine-tuning.
               Pre-training involves training a model on a related task or a large dataset to learn
               general features and patterns. For example, large language models are pre-trained in
               huge corpora such as Wikipedia. Then, fine-tuning follows, where the model's
               parameters are adjusted on a smaller labeled dataset related to the specific target
               task (i.e. NER). This process allows the model to leverage prior knowledge from
               pre-training and adapt to the target task, leading to improved performance. This is a
               popular approach in Deep Learning called transfer learning (; ), especially when
               dealing with limited labeled data, besides the usual supervised, unsupervised and
               reinforcement learning approaches.
            In the context of transfer learning, zero-shot and few-shot learning are approaches
               that leverage pre-trained models to address limited data scenarios. Zero-shot
               learning aims to recognize new classes unseen during training by utilizing semantic
               relationships or embeddings learned from related classes. This allows the model to
               make predictions on entirely novel categories without any fine-tuning on specific
               examples. On the other hand, few-shot learning focuses on learning from a few
               examples of each new class. The model adapts its knowledge from pre-training to
               recognize and generalize to new classes with only a small amount of labeled data.
               These techniques significantly enhance the capabilities of transfer learning,
               enabling models to excel in situations with minimal labeled data and effectively
               tackle new and previously unseen tasks.
            Hyperparameters, such as epochs and learning rate, are crucial settings in deep
               learning models that are not learned from the data during training. Instead, they are
               set before training begins and can significantly impact the model's performance.
               "Epochs" represent the number of times the model iterates through the entire dataset
               during training. Increasing epochs can allow the model to see the data more times but
               may risk overfitting. "Learning rate" controls the step size for updating the model's
               parameters during training. A high learning rate can lead to faster convergence, but
               it might cause overshooting and instability. Balancing these hyperparameters is
               essential to achieve optimal training and ensure the model generalizes well to new,
               unseen data.
            Two types of systems make use of Deep Learning in this paper: OCR and NER. Optical
               Character Recognition (OCR) is a technology that utilizes neural networks and
               computer vision techniques to automatically recognize and extract text from images or
               scanned documents. Deep learning models, such as Convolutional Neural Networks
               (CNNs), are employed to learn the complex features of characters and words, enabling
               accurate text recognition. Named Entity Recognition (NER) systems are a type of
               natural language processing (NLP) technology that uses deep learning and machine
               learning techniques to automatically identify and classify named entities in text.
               NER systems employ models, such as recurrent neural networks (RNNs) or
               transformer-based architectures like BERT, to learn the patterns and context of words
               in sentences, allowing them to recognize and label named entities accurately.
            
         
