Title:  Textual Reuse in the Eighteenth Century: Mining Eliza
                    Haywood’s Quotations
Volume:  010
Issue:  1
Date:  12 February 2016
Abstract:  
                
                This article introduces a novel approach to textual reuse in order to identify
                    the sources of previously unattributed quotations within the work of Eliza
                    Haywood. The article offers a brief introduction to methods used previously
                    within the field of historical text reuse, describes the combinatorial ngram
                    approach used within the present work, then shows how this method can help us
                    better understand the complex inner workings of Eliza Haywood’s most celebrated
                    novel, Betsy Thoughtless. 
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                Literary scholars often argue that the eighteenth century witnessed a revolution
                    in notions of authorship, one that moved from a culture based on imitation to a
                    culture organized around the production of original utterances. One of the
                        earlier works to discuss this shift in notions of authorial originality is
                        Elizabeth Louis Mann's The Problem of Originality in
                            English Literary Criticism, 1750-1800 (Ph.D. Dissertation,
                        University of Chicago: 1939). More recent scholarship on the subject may be
                        found in Loy Martin's Changing the Past: Theories of
                            Influence and Originality, 1680-1830
                        Disposito, Vol. 4, No. 12 (1979): 189-212;
                        George Buelow: Originality, Genius, Plagiarism in
                            English Criticism of the Eighteenth Century
                        International Review of the Aesthetics and Sociology of
                            Music, Vol. 21, No. 2 (1990): 117-128; and Reginald McGinnis
                        (ed.), Originality and Intellectual Property in the
                            French and English Enlightenments, London: Routledge,
                        2009. Since at least the publication of Harold Ogden White's Plagiarism and Imitation during the English
                        Renaissance, scholars have maintained that those writing in the
                    seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries endorsed the model of imitatio that one finds throughout classical writing:
                        That early modern writing does not
                        operate according to the logic of original invention is well known,
                    writes Max Thomas: 
                        Between the residual medieval
                            tradition of compilatio and the humanistic practices of
                                copia and inventio, the dominant structure
                            of writing was largely imitative
                        
                    . By the 1750s, however, the scene had changed. It is in the middle of the 18th century, writes George Buelow, that 
                        the concept of originality . . .
                            become[s] [a] significant elemen[t] in critical writings, and it is on
                            this foundation of new ideas that much of the further development of
                            aesthetic criticism as well as actual artistic achievement in all the
                            arts was made possible in the 19th
                            century
                        
                    . During this pivotal period, celebrated works like Edward Young's Conjectures on Original Composition helped make Originality . . . the main force in the
                        creative process, driving out earlier endorsements of imitation with
                    an insistence on each author's individual genius . While Young's famous letter to Richardson often features
                        prominently in discussions of originality within the eighteenth century, it
                        is helpful to read Young alongside other similar works from the period, such
                        as William Sharpe's Dissertation upon Genius
                        (1755), Richard Hurd's Letter to Mr. Mason; on
                            the Marks of Imitation 1757), and Edward Capell's response to
                        Hurd in Reflections on Originality in Authors
                        (1766). For relevant secondary works on the imitation-originality axis in
                        eighteenth-century literature, see in particular: Robert Mack: The Genius of Parody: Imitation and Originality in
                            Seventeenth- and Eighteenth-Century English Literature. London:
                        Palgrave, 2007; William Kupersmith: English Versions of
                            Roman Satire in the Earlier Eighteenth Century. Newark:
                        University of Delaware Press, 2007; Tom Huhn: Imitation
                            and Society: The Persistence of Mimesis in the Aesthetics of Burke,
                            Hogarth, and Kant. University Park: Pennsylvania State
                        University, 2004; and Roland Mortier: L'originalité:
                            une nouvelle catégorie esthétique au siècle les lumières.
                        Genève: Librarie Droz, 1982.
                 Written in the midst of this cultural shift, Eliza Haywood’s 1751 novel Betsy Thoughtless includes a wide variety of passages
                    drawn from an array of previous literary texts, and offers an interesting case
                    study of the struggle between mimesis and authorial originality during the
                    eighteenth century. Unfortunately, adequate study of Haywood’s intertextual
                    borrowings has heretofore been limited because previous scholarship has been
                    unable to identify the sources for many of the passages borrowed in Haywood’s
                    writing. In an attempt to help fill this scholarly gap, the present study
                    introduces a novel algorithmic method that can be used to identify instances of
                    intertextuality in large data sets, and shows how one can leverage this workflow
                    to generate new insights on the nature of intertextuality in literary texts such
                    as Haywood’s novel. 
            

                Detecting Textual Reuse with Combinatorial Ngrams
                The methods used within the present study may be best illustrated by comparison
                    with previous work in the field of historical text reuse. In their research on
                    intertextuality in classical texts, Neil Coffee et al. use a sliding window
                    technique to find passages wherein two texts share at least two words, then rank
                    the matching window results according to the proximity and rarity of the words
                    shared in the two windows. Jean-Gabriel Ganascia et al. also use a sliding
                    window technique and score matches based on word rarity, though they allow for
                    missing words in their sliding windows such that two windows of five words can
                    count as a match if they share three words in common. David Smith et al. use a
                    sliding n-gram window to establish candidate pairs, leverage the Smith-Waterman
                    algorithm to align matching sequences in documents, and finally sort documents
                    with matching windows according to the frequency of their common n-grams.
                    Similarly, Constance Mews et al. also use a sequence alignment technique that
                    matches strings based on identical words. Moving away from a sliding window
                    technique, Glenn Roe et al. measure the cosine distance between passages in a
                    term document matrix, while David Bamman et al. use Moore's Bilingual Sentence
                    Aligner and a translation probability table generated from MGIZA++ to identify
                    cross-lingual instances of intertextuality. 
                The present study extends the candidate retrieval step of Jean-Gabriel Ganascia
                    et al., and implements a minimal probabilistic model to remove high probability
                    ngrams from the database in order to reduce both storage requirements and
                    processing time. The first step of the method used within the present study is
                    to preprocess each file in a corpus, transform each file into an array of
                    sentences using the Punkt sentence boundary detector, drop stopwords, remove
                    non-token punctuation, and lowercase all text. Because orthography was
                    non-standardized in the eighteenth century, the lookup table from MorphAdorner
                    is then used to regularize the spelling of each word in the text, using a simple
                    hash table replacement. Finally, the WordNet Lemmatizer is used to transform
                    each word into its lemma form.
                Once the texts are all represented as lists of clean and normalized sentences,
                    the next step of analysis is to find sentences with unusually similar language.
                    To accomplish this, a sliding window of length w is slid over each
                    sentence in the corpus such that for each sentence, the window first contains
                    words 0 through w-1 from the sentence, then 1 through
                        w, then 2 through w+1, and so on. For each of
                    these windows, a list of all possible combinations of c words from
                    the window is generated. Suppose c is 3, and the algorithm is
                    considering the following sentence:
                
                        All saw her spots but few her
                            brightness took.
                        
                    
                Using this window of text, the list of combinatorial ngrams produced
                    includes all saw her, all saw spots, all saw but . . .
                        her brightness took. In order to minimize the storage requirements
                    and maximize the utility of these ngrams, the algorithm next estimates the
                    rarity of each ngram by calculating the product of the relative frequency of
                    each word in the ngram. The probabilities for individual words were
                        retrieved from the Google Ngrams corpus. The source code for the present
                        study includes probability tables drawn from both the 1 Million English
                        Google Ngrams corpus and the All English Google Ngrams corpus. In both
                        cases, word probabilities were normalized by dividing the number of books
                        that contained the target word by the global maximum number of times a word
                        appeared in a book.  The rarity of the ngram spots few
                        brightness, for instance, is calculated as p(spots) * p(few) *
                    p(brightness). Because ngrams with high probability are much more likely to be
                    found often in a corpus and are therefore much less useful for detecting textual
                    reuse, they are dropped from the list, and the remaining ngrams are stored in a
                    database.
                 Once this database is produced, one can scour it for instances of textual reuse
                    by feeding in additional documents, processing them in the same way, and
                    comparing the combinatorial ngrams in each sentence from the input document to
                    the sentences archived in the database. Within the present study, roughly
                        half a million texts were collected from the Text Creation Partnership,
                        Internet Archive, Project Gutenberg, Google Books, and Literature Online,
                        and all were processed in this fashion. An estimation of the
                    similarity of two sentences can be produced by simply summing up the number of
                    combinatorial ngrams shared by those two sentences and normalizing by the length
                    of the sentence. Take for example the following passage from Nathaniel Lee’s
                        Alexander the Great, which the present method
                    flags as a candidate for the quotation from Betsy
                        Thoughtless discussed above: 
                
                        All find my spots, but few observe my
                            brightness
                        
                    
                
                While the sequential sliding window technique often employed in studies of text
                    reuse only identifies a single shared trigram between these two passages
                        (spots but few), the combinatorial ngram method gives a stronger
                    indication of their semantic similarity, yielding 10 combinatorial trigram
                    matches for the pair. Using this simple and scalable technique on the works of
                    Eliza Haywood, we shall see below, allows one to rapidly identify instances of
                    textual reuse and thereby improve our understanding of the production and
                    dissemination of literary texts in the long eighteenth century. Using a
                        48-core server with 3 TB of RAM maintained by the University of Notre Dame’s
                        Center for Research Computing, the method described above was able to
                        process roughly half a million literary texts (~5GB on disk) in six hours.
                    
            

                Mining Eliza Haywood’s Quotations
                Although much of Eliza Haywood’s biography remains mysterious, she was notorious
                    within the literary circles of her day. After early careers as an actress and
                    successful playwright, Haywood embarked upon a prolific career as a writer that
                    would lead one eighteenth-century biographer to call her perhaps the most voluminous female writer this kingdom ever
                        produced. Many of the works in her canon offered critical if comical
                    responses to high-profile works by male literati of the day. In titles such as
                        The Female Spectator, Anti-Pamela, Memoirs of the Court of
                        Lilliput, and The Female Dunciad,
                    Haywood transformed works by Joseph Addison, Samuel Richardson, Jonathan Swift,
                    and Alexander Pope into biting commentary on the gender inequality within
                    eighteenth-century England. For these efforts, Alexander Pope granted Haywood a
                    position next to the goddess Dullness in The
                        Dunciad, and James Sterling crowned Haywood alongside Aphra Behn and
                    Delarivier Manley in his fair triumvirate of
                        wit, both of which acts attest to Haywood’s elevated status in the
                    eighteenth-century world of letters.
                In works from her later years, such as her best-known novel Betsy Thoughtless, Haywood used realistic portraits of the social
                    dynamics of eighteenth-century England to fight for gender equality. She also
                    borrowed an unusually large quantity of material from previous writers, weaving
                    vast quantities of quotations from previous literature into her own writing. In
                    the case of Betsy Thoughtless, as Andrea Austin has
                    noted, Haywood leaves most of these quotations unattributed: 
                        The overwhelming majority of
                            quotations follow the introductory phrase, as the poet says, or
                            some variation thereof, leaving the reader to determine the source of
                            her borrowing . . . . Only in a few instances does she identify the
                            original source
                        
                    . The majority of these mysterious quotations have remained unsourced ever
                    since, perhaps because Haywood’s representations of the source material often
                    depart significantly from the source texts themselves. As Kathryn R. King
                    observes in her standard edition of Haywood’s works, 
                        Haywood could be highly creative
                            in her use of sources, embroidering here and there on hints she found in
                            them and seldom exhibiting an overnice regard for considerations of
                            veracity . . . . Her reworkings of her sources deserve, in fact, a study
                            of their own.
                        
                    . Armed with the vast digital databases that have recently become
                    available, it is now possible to heed King’s call and trace Haywood’s reworkings
                    of source material in close detail. 
                Using the method discussed above, I was able to identify likely sources of all
                    but three of the eighteen previously unsourced quotations in Betsy Thoughtless, yielding a recall value of
                        83.3%. It is worth noting that measuring recall for text reuse
                        detection methods is often difficult or impossible, because many data sets
                        lack ground truth values against which to compare the results of the
                        classification task. Pursuing the sources for previously unsourced
                        quotations offers one way around this problem, as borrowed quotations
                        announce that they are reusing text from previous works. Both the
                    sources of the identified passages and Haywood’s representations of those
                    sources are indicated in Table 1 below. Comparing Haywood’s renderings with her
                    sources, one finds that Haywood often changes her sources in provocative ways.
                    Consider, for example, the following passage from Betsy
                        Thoughtless: 
                        Secrets of marriage should be sacred held, 
                        Their sweets and bitters by the wife conceal'd. 
                    
                
                This passage is adapted from John Dryden’s Aureng
                        Zebe, in which one reads: 
                         Secrets of Marriage still are sacred held,
                        Their sweet and bitter by the wife concealed; 
                        Errors of wives reflect on husbands still. 
                    
                By closely comparing these passages, one finds that Haywood withheld the feminist
                    punchline of Dryden’s stanza: Errors of wives
                        reflect on husbands still. Perhaps of greater import is the fact
                    that while Dryden believed secrets of marriage
                    were still held sacred, Haywood needed to implore that secrets of
                    marriage should be held sacred. Such repetitions with a difference
                    abound in Haywood’s textual reuse, and might well reflect Haywood’s position on
                    the status of institutions such as marriage in her day. 
                Comparing Haywood’s adaptations to their source passages also helps to reveal one
                    reason why previous editors have had difficulty identifying the sources of her
                    quotations, namely the fact that Haywood often combined lines from disparate
                    literary works into a single passage and then passed the resulting passage off
                    as a quotation of extant works. Take, for example, the following passage
                    from Betsy Thoughtless:
                
                    Pleas'd with destruction, proud to be undone,
                    With open arms I to my ruin run,
                    And sought the mischiefs I was bid to shun;
                    Tempted that shame a virgin ought to dread,
                    And had not the excuse of being betray'd [111]
                
                Like other instances of intertextuality in Haywood's writing, this passage
                    appears to derive from multiple sources. The first line appears in the poet and
                    doctor Richard Blackmore's Advice to the Poets,
                    where Blackmore writes: 
                
                    Let 'em this generous Resolution own, 
                    That they are pleas'd and proud to be undone . 
                
                The second and third lines of Haywood's aforementioned passage borrow language
                    from The Basset Table, a poem believed to have been
                    written by Mary Wortley Montagu, John Gay, or Alexander Pope, wherein one finds
                    the lines: 
                
                    I know the bite, yet to my ruin run, 
                    And see the folly which I cannot shun .
                             Norman Ault reported some time ago that 
                                the problem of the
                                    authorship of Court Poems [the
                                    volume in which The Basset Table
                                    appears] is baffling, and cannot . . . be regarded as
                                    settled
                                
                            . Writing some years thereafter, however, Robert Halsband
                            suggested that 
                                whatever mistakes Pope's
                                    posthumous editors made . . . his friends as well as he knew
                                    that The Basset-Table...was by Lady
                                    Mary
                                
                            .
                
                Here and elsewhere, Haywood combines multiple variegated texts in order to
                    produce her own poetic formulation, confusing the boundary between original and
                    derivative utterances in a way that anticipates our own remix
                    culture.
                 All of these remixed, composite quotations in Betsy
                        Thoughtless fall within the novel’s early chapters, wherein the
                    titular Betsy keeps questionable company and may indeed appear
                        thoughtless. By the end of the novel, however, Betsy
                    repents for her wayward youth and devotes herself to a single love, Mr.
                    Trueworth. Interestingly, as Betsy completes her transition from flighty youth
                    to dedicated lover, the passages Haywood borrows from other texts also become
                    more faithful to their source texts. By calculating the Jaccard Similarity
                    Coefficient between Haywood’s source passage and Haywood’s rendering of that
                    passage for each borrowed quotation within the novel, one can visualize this
                    general trend:
                
                    This plot depicts the similarity between Eliza Haywood’s source text and
                        Haywood’s rendering of that source text for each quotation within Betsy
                        Thoughtless. 
                    
                
                While it is impossible to say whether Haywood intentionally made her
                    rendering of quotations more faithful over the course of her novel, this trend
                    does offer a curious parallel to the psychological development of her
                    protagonist, who steadily rejects her misbegotten youth and devotes herself to a
                    dedicated relationship with Mr. Trueworth. Whether this trend generalizes to
                    other works within or beyond the Haywood canon remains for future work to
                    determine.
                Finally and most astonishingly, tracing the sources of Haywood’s adapted
                    quotations reveals that a significant portion of the poetic passages Haywood
                    incorporates into her own writing are derived from a single work of literary
                    extracts, the 1710 edition of Edward Bysshe’s Art of
                        English Poetry. Bysshe’s volume is essentially a collection of
                    literary passages organized into hundreds of themes such as Love,
                    Gypsy, and so on. As Table 1 shows, nearly half of the quotations Haywood
                    adapts in Betsy Thoughtless are present in Bysshe’s
                    volume. One could take for example the point in the novel wherein Lady Mellasin
                    reflects on the beauty of Miss Flora, and Haywood uses the following phrase to
                    introduce a borrowed quotation: [Lady Mellasin]
                        had often heard and read of men, whose resentment had been softened and
                        melted into tenderness on the appearance of a lovely object: — as the poet
                        somewhere or other expresses it... [519]. Having created a need for
                    a passage on beauty, Haywood then weaves in a passage found under the Beauty heading in Bysshe’s volume:

                
                    Beauty, like ice, our footing does betray; 
                    Who can tread sure on the smooth slipp’ry way? 
                
                Some few pages later in the novel, Haywood introduces yet another quotation from
                    the Beauty section in Bysshe’s volume [536].
                    Examining passages such as the above, it seems Haywood often introduced her
                    quotations with vague phrases like as the poet somewhere or other expresses
                        it because she didn’t yet know which poet she would quote, or the text
                    from which she would quote. She merely intended to look up a relevant heading in
                    Bysshe’s volume and siphon off a quote from that page.
                 Some of the passages Haywood derived from Bysshe offer even more telling clues
                    that The Art of English Poetry was Haywood’s main
                    source for literary extracts. Consider, for example, the following borrowed
                    passage in Betsy Thoughtless:
                
                    Ingratitude's the sin, which, first or last, 
                    Taints the whole sex; the catching court-disease. [322]
                
                This rendering departs ever so slightly from its source text, Nathaniel Lee’s
                        Mithridates:
                
                    Inconstancy, the plague that first or last
                    Taints the whole sex, the catching court-disease. 
                
                What would have led Haywood to replace the first word of Lee’s passage,
                        Inconstancy, with her own term Ingratitude? It is likely that
                    Haywood accidentally made this change after discovering Lee’s lines within
                        The Art of English Poetry, where the borrowed
                    lines are followed by a large subject heading for Ingratitude
                    :
                
                    A page image from the 1710 Art of English
                            Poetry
                        
                    
                    
                
                These discovered debts to Bysshe’s work support and extend the research of Carol
                    Stewart, who found that many of the literary references in Haywood’s novel
                        The Invisible Spy may be found within The Art of English Poetry
                    . As Table 1 indicates, a number of
                    previously unsourced quotations from across the Haywood corpus contain material
                    found in Bysshe’s work, which suggests Haywood’s reading may not have been as
                    voluminous as her writing once made it appear. 
            

                Neither Close nor Distant: Algorithmic Reading
                 The foregoing analysis has demonstrated one way researchers can use
                    computational methods to trace patterns in intertextuality within literary
                    texts. Using a novel method to scour large text collections for patterns of
                    textual reuse, the present study has discovered many sources for the borrowed
                    passages in Eliza Haywood’s writing. By examining those passages in detail, one
                    finds that many of Haywood’s changes to her source materials may well help
                    reveal both her position on contemporary institutions as well as the particular
                    editions of works from which she derived the borrowings. Furthermore, examining
                    Haywood’s borrowed quotations in the aggregate, one finds that the degree of
                    similarity between her source materials and her own representation of those
                    materials offers a provocative parallel to her protagonist’s psychological
                    development over the course of Betsy Thoughtless.
                    Lastly and most curiously, one finds that a shocking portion of the quotations
                    Haywood incorporated into her texts derive from a single work of literary
                    extracts from the period, the 1710 edition of Edward Bysshe’s Art of English Poetry. In sum, closely attending to
                    the texts Haywood borrowed — including their original sources, the contexts in
                    which Haywood introduces those passages, and the ways in which she modifies them
                    — offers a series of rare glimpses into the finer points of a powerful and
                    playful writer’s mind. 
                Table 1 may be accessed via the following url: https://goo.gl/7G0QFH
            
