Title:  Building the 
Volume:  013
Issue:  3
Date:  14 October 2019
Abstract:  
                
                This article articulates a digital adaptation of enumerative bibliography and
                    argues for its recuperative potential in feminist literary history. Digital
                    enumerative bibliography uses bibliographical structures within a relational
                    database that allows researchers to track more relevant metadata such as
                    geographical location of subject matter, language, and time period. Whereas
                    traditional enumerative bibliographies use a hierarchy of textual data, a
                    relational database creates a nexus that facilitates new kinds of research
                    queries. As an example, we offer our digital project the Women in Book History Bibliography and use its 1,550 citations as a
                    dataset to trace what is women’s book history. We then advocate for digital
                    enumerative bibliography as a form of feminist recovery efforts that recovers
                    not only primary texts but scholarship about them. 
            
Full Body Text: 


                Digital Enumerative Bibliography as Preservation of Feminist Labor
                Our thanks to the 2017 conference of the North American Society for the Study
                    of Romanticism for their feedback on an early draft of this essay. Funding for
                    this project was provided by the Beth Qualls Endowed Fellowship and what is now
                    the Center of Digital Humanities Research at Texas A&M University. Special
                    thanks to Laura Mandell and Bryan Tarpley.
                In 2014, Michelle Levy asked, Do Women
                        Have a Book History? She continues that Robert Darnton’s  influential communication circuit is silent on the question of gender
                    and 
                        too rigid to capture the full range
                            of women’s involvement in the production and dissemination of literary
                            writing even during the print era
                    	; 
                    . This question is one that resonates more widely, especially for feminist
                    book historians who encounter a wide range of literature that is rich in its
                    history of production processes, readings of bibliographic objects, and
                    histories of circulation and reception, but largely silent
                    about gender. Levy’s question is indicative of the key issue with women’s book
                    history: despite significant work in the field, there is no narrative, no
                    central theses or arguments that join together the diverse body of work on
                    women’s work and labor. The phrase women’s book history is itself rare,
                    as it appears less than ten times in the scholarship that we have located. This
                    had led many to believe that the answer to Levy’s question might be no,
                    or perhaps not yet. 
                In response, we began to gather data in the form of secondary source citations in
                    an enumerative bibliography on the intersection of women’s lives and book
                    history. In 2016, this became the Women in Book History
                        Bibliography (WBHB). The WBHB is an open-access bibliography that, in its
                    earliest iteration, used lists generated in Zotero to create listings of sources
                    which intersected with our definitions of women and book history, which were
                    clustered in established subfields like authorship, manuscript studies, reading,
                    and the book trades. We began this project because, similarly to the question
                    that motivated Levy’s article, we had an issue with a lack of a clear
                    disciplinary history to pull from in our dissertation research on early modern
                    English print culture. We hoped that by sharing secondary sources we could help
                    others as we helped each other. Thanks to a generous grant from what is now the
                    Center of Digital Humanities Research (CoDHR) at Texas A&M University, in
                    2017 we transitioned the bibliography to a MySQL database with a front end
                    written in Django. We capitalized on the capabilities of a relational database
                    to include filters that allow users to isolate sources by tags including
                    geographic location, language, year, author, and a more robust list of subfields
                    that includes archival studies, digital media, LGBTQ+, critical race theory, and
                    indigeneity.
                
                    The WBHB as first displayed in 2016.
                    
                    Screenshot of 2016 website interface.
                
                
                    The WBHB’s searchable interface, 2019.
                    
                    Screenshot of updated website interface.
                
                This platform promotes ongoing work in women’s book history by making scholarship
                    and resources on women's writing and labor visible. Collecting data, making this
                    work count by writing it into the historical record, is a
                    feminist act that preserves the past while shaping the future. When we first
                    launched the site, we were not prepared for the enthusiastic response, nor that
                    this project was a visible indicator of a growing pushback against what one
                    might think of as traditional bibliography, the field that
                    grew from the work of W.W. Greg, Fredson Bowers, and G. Thomas Tanselle.
                    Bibliography as a discipline has its origins in studies on the Bible and
                    Shakespeare, and has, historically, not focused on women’s experiences nor those
                    of other under-represented subject positions and genres. Considering the
                    development of women’s book history alongside black bibliography, queer
                    bibliography, the postcolonial and indigenous book, and the global book suggests
                    that one future of digital and material studies is as an activist discourse with
                    deep ties to critical theory.
                To explore the latter possibility, this essay uses the example of our digital
                    enumerative bibliography to demonstrate that feminist approaches to digital
                    humanities and book history have much to offer the recovery of women’s literary
                    history and promote its ongoing construction. They work together to create new
                    methodologies and revise existing structures to correctly position women’s
                    contributions to textual production in a historically and materially accurate
                    context. While our larger concerns are on the history of the book, this
                    article’s primary focus is on bibliographic methods for feminist intervention.
                    We use bibliography’s epistemological work as a revisionist methodology that
                    counteracts patriarchal structures as it reorganizes itself around feminist
                    ones. Secondly, we look at the larger implications of data gathering on the
                    epistemology of book history and draw conclusions about what a feminist
                    historiography reveals about women’s history and studies on the book. Lastly, we
                    touch on the structural implications of working on marginal subjects while being
                    precariously employed. This dual precarity adds an urgency to the responsible
                    preservation of digital literary recovery efforts, and we provide a roadmap for
                    thinking through these issues.
            

                Digital Enumerative Bibliography
                Our feminist approach to revising the narrative of book history centers on
                    bibliography. It is an important ancestor to book history, as one aspect of the
                    field grew from debates in textual and historical bibliography in the 1970s and
                    1980s . Similarly, Amy E. Earhart  argues that digital humanities pulls from
                    bibliography in its methods and some of its more conservative ideologies that
                    have prioritized work on white male literary subjects. See also , . Intervening
                    within these narratives allows us to repurpose bibliography in both material and
                    digital iterations of the book history .
                The WBHB began as a simple enumerative bibliography,
                    as this was the most familiar tool to solve a common problem — finding and
                    organizing sources around a central topic. Enumerative bibliographies are
                    accessible for both creators and users. Every scholar has experience with them
                    as references at the end of articles and books. They not only let a researcher
                    collect data, but present it in a hierarchy that suggests importance and the
                    relationships of textual data . Enumerative
                    bibliography is a deceptively simple form that can seemingly be done with little
                    critical thought: adopting a common citation style and plugging information into
                    a reference manager can generate a bibliography in seconds. These lists are
                    simple, but they are powerful. They are the tools 
                        for which the non-bibliographer
                            breathes a silent prayer of thanks whenever beginning a new research
                            project
                        
                    . Its influence on field-building and encouraging future scholarship is
                    substantial. For example, in the early twentieth century African-American
                    literary scholars like Dorothy B. Porter used enumerative bibliography to
                    establish the field as a legitimate discourse . In
                    short, bibliographic lists become the first step towards canon development, and
                    from there to actual disciplinary creation.
                Our project pulls directly from this tradition, but it uses a digital format to
                    create a dynamic and adaptive version of static numbered lists that we refer to
                    as digital enumerative bibliography. Similarly to
                    projects like The Science Fiction and Fantasy Research
                        Database and the World Shakespeare
                        Bibliography, the WBHB takes the
                    foundational basics of organization from enumerative bibliography but presents
                    it in a digital format through a relational database, with additional search
                    functions and the ability to organize objects by relevant metadata. Enumerative
                    bibliography’s print-focused history is not erased in this process but
                    reimagined around one of bibliography’s key concepts: purpose. Gregson Bowers
                    argues that bibliography is intimately connected to data’s imagined purpose. He
                    believes that to collect information for the sake of itself would only make
                    bibliography 
                        a limited science
                        
                    . To meet users’ needs of referencing material that is otherwise
                    uncollected, we still use the visuals of a printed bibliography on the front end
                    to help users encounter data in familiar ways. We have also retained the
                    taxonomies of a print-based bibliography as an organizational structure by using
                    the same fields that a citation generator like Zotero would use: author, title,
                    publisher, and year. 
                Digital enumerative bibliography moves beyond these organizational structures,
                    however. It allows us to think about historiography as data. The underlying
                    infrastructure of a relational database shifts the framework from Harmon’s
                    bibliographic hierarchy to a nexus of interconnected data that surrounds a core
                    organizing function — the title of a secondary source. As Stephen Ramsay writes,
                    databases cover a wealth of 
                        fascinating problems and
                            intellectual opportunities
                        
                     that are of interest to bibliographers: 
                        The inclusion of certain data (and the attendant
                            exclusion of others), the mapping of relationships among entities, the
                            often collaborative nature of dataset creation, and the eventual
                            visualization of information patterns, all imply a hermeneutics and a
                            set of possible methodologies that are themselves worthy objects for
                            study and reflection.
                        
                    
                Digital enumerative bibliography incorporates these possibilities into the
                    existing epistemological work of disciplinary lists. Databases can supplement
                    standard bibliographic data by tracking information that is normally latent
                    rather than explicit in common citation styles, such as format of publication; a
                    citation format will change based on if it is a journal article or book, but
                    most humanities citation styles do not explicitly include format. Our database’s
                    taxonomy does. There is consequently a shift in thinking about bibliographic
                    data’s use beyond pointing to sources for further reading. It allows us to ask
                    questions about our field by what language we use to title our sources and
                    where, when, and in what format we publish. Further, databases allow for
                    extraction of these individual pieces of data as they meet changing criteria
                    based on users’ interests, which a static list does not. This means that digital
                    enumerative bibliography facilitates new kinds of research than print-focused
                    versions.
                
                    
                    
                    Database design visual.
                
                Historiography choices in the WBHB are expressed
                    through those sources we go out of our way to find and what subfields we index
                    in and by what criteria. As Daniel V. Pitti observes, it is difficult to reduce
                    the complexities of historical and material documents to the constraints of
                    database design . However, queries plugged
                    into a well-designed database can 
                        reveal intellectual relations
                            between unique entities, but also between categories or classes of
                            entities based on shared characteristics
                        
                    . We designed the WBHB to uncover
                        intellectual relations in the shared characteristics of
                    language, geography, subject, and time period for our sources. For example,
                    analyzing sources in the database that focus on manuscript or print shows that
                    there is a distinct shift in scholarly emphasis from manuscript to print in the
                    English Renaissance. This is an important tool for the feminist book historian
                    studying English literature, as a point of interest is that the rise of print
                    was a shift toward a form of textual production that favored male writers for
                    many years . As another example, sorting the database
                    by the LGBT+ tag shows that most of the sources we have located in this area
                    focus on late-twentieth century periodicals in the United States, and there is a
                    dearth of pre-modernist scholarship in English on queer identities and the
                    material book or a queered production of the book. While one must be careful
                    about making broad arguments based on an artificial construction of sources,
                    these searches nevertheless indicate that expanding enumerative bibliography to
                    the full relational potential of a database allows scholars to ask dramatically
                    more expansive questions about our field and how it is practiced.
                Gathering sources around an idea for which there is no critical consensus is a
                    deeply ideological act that can influence how users will conceptualize the field
                    moving forward. All of our subfield editorial choices are political, even more
                    so than the explicit idea of a bibliography that is focused on women. By asking
                    questions like what field is this a part of? we are
                    imagining audiences’ interests and shaping the kinds of research we would like
                    to facilitate on our website. Our choices are intentionally intersectionally
                    feminist. And because users can download the database and run their own
                    analyses, the data can be used in ways we have not yet imagined as well. Thus,
                    the most exciting avenue of research in digital enumerative bibliography is that
                    users can reinterpret the data through queries and outputs that the static
                    hierarchy of a list might otherwise prohibit. 
            

                Tracking a Women’s History of the Book
                Just as the Database of Early English Playbooks
                    facilitates different research questions than W. W. Greg’s A Bibliography of the English Printed Drama to the Restoration
                    , the digital database of the WBHB allows users to ask new questions about studies of the book
                    and implicit values. These queries reveal trends, patterns, and overlaps about
                    both book history (as a digital and material practice) and feminist literary
                    studies. This section details what we found by analyzing data in the WBHB and suggests that a feminist collection of
                    scholarship on the material and digital book challenges the idea of book history
                    as separate from gender. 
                A feminist approach to cataloguing information on women’s interactions with the
                    book is necessary because most major publications in book studies neglect these
                    experiences. For example, women’s work is poorly or narrowly represented across
                    book history companions and readers. The massive Oxford
                        Companion to the Book
                     has no space — or entries — for Gender,
                    Women,
                    Race,
                    Sex, nor does its mass-market counterpart The Book:
                        A Global History
                    . As these books are not exceptions but
                    representative examples, it is clear that too many studies in the field of book
                    history reiterate its oldest sins in emphasizing the experiences and works of
                    white, Anglo-European, cis-het men. 
                In contrast to this absence, the 1,550 sources in the WBHB make a convincing case that while work on women in book
                    history may be discursively marginal, it is not meager in number. Analyzing this
                    dataset allows us to isolate two challenges to the male-centric state of book
                    studies. First, we can interrogate with more accuracy and force the assumption
                    of our subjects’ marginality. The sources in the WBHB suggest that while women are on the margins in comparison to
                    the wealth of information on male subjects and their texts, it is less clear
                    that they were marginal historically. Rather than reflecting
                    historical accuracy, our modern scholarship is driven by the implicit value of
                    male-driven authorship and production as reflected in the Oxford editions. The
                        WBHB data instead allows us to revise some of
                    our key arguments about women and textual production, even those that grow from
                    a feminist desire to conceptualize this experience. As an example, Leslie Howsam
                    wrote in her groundbreaking 1998 article: 
                        It is important … to remark on something that is
                            concealed by thematic theoretical models: most of the women whose work
                            in the book cycle has been so painstakingly discovered by researchers
                            have been atypical individuals, outstanding anomalies in a cultural
                            field dominated by men. Most publishers and editors have been men; the
                            majority of writers of scholarly, legal, and theological and political
                            works were men; printing trade workers at all levels were almost always
                            men … For the most part, what [Lucien] Febvre and [Henri-Jean] Martin
                            called the little world of the book has
                            been a male domain.
                        
                    
                Howsam's essay reflects a field that was still recovering women writers, much
                    less women’s labor in roles like hawking that were less valued than
                    property-owning members of the trade like booksellers . Since 1998, projects like the Perdita Manuscripts,
                        Orlando, and the Women Writers Project
                    have added to our knowledge of women’s writing and textual production, and a
                    significant branch of scholarship has grown from these resources. In the years
                    since Howsam’s essay was published, much more has been discovered about textual
                    production in general and about women’s roles specifically, and long-standing
                    scholarship has been brought back into the light. As an example, Bell , Smith , and Coker  have troubled the male-dominated narrative of the
                    early modern book trades, instead painting a picture of women’s involvement in
                    all aspects of print production. Women’s labor is harder to identify than the
                    booksellers whose names appear on title pages, but it nevertheless exists.
                    Printers’ wives and daughters managed shops and were bookkeepers , and widows ran powerful businesses. But women were
                    not just wives and widows . They were feminist
                    activists, printing as a way to reclaim agency  and
                    building on a culture of women printers 
                    . They used print to give voice to marginalized
                    communities 
                    
                    .
                This brief account of feminist book history scholarship falls short of the
                    breadth and depth of the field, as it is largely limited to women and print in
                    early modern England and the United States, the area where we primarily focus
                    and which the sources in the WBHB database best
                    represent. Yet even this limited case study makes visible an important revision.
                    It is no longer certain that women were historically marginal in that they were
                    a group so small they were hardly worth mentioning. Rather, they were
                    continually present in the making, writing, and reading of books. Women have
                    been, as Howsam phrases it, 
                        identified at every node in the cycle and at all periods
                            in history, from the printers’ widow operating independently in the
                            circuit guilds of early modern Europe to the avid readership of romance
                            novels, not to mention a strong tradition of women’s writing … Others
                            perform the invisible but essential services of publishers’ readers,
                            translators, designers, copy-editors, and indexers.
                        
                    
                This is a point that has been reiterated by Helen Smith , Bell , and Levy  — that
                    women have always been physically present if not always leaving material traces
                    that are as easily identifiable. What the sources in the WBHB emphasize is that women’s experiences are much harder to grasp
                    and more likely to slip by as invisible labor. 
                This is a position that women share with other subjects on the margins and in
                    between categories, and it may then be possible to use digital enumerative
                    bibliographies to fill in gaps and silences in parallel ways to those who
                    reconstruct lost voices in the archives. As Lauren F. Klein demonstrates with
                    James Hemmings , data visualization and mapping can
                    capture lost histories and combat the forces of erasure that leave important
                    histories behind. What the WBHB suggests is that
                    the visualization and analysis of secondary sources can also uncover important
                    trends about how scholarship on marginal figures slips in and out of our value
                    systems. Often recovery efforts begin with the assumption
                    that something is lost only to discover it was just overlooked, hiding in plain
                    sight. Collecting and analyzing secondary sources on women and the book has
                    shown us this is the case with book history. 
                Consequently, the second contribution that analyzing a database of secondary
                    sources on a marginal topic yields is that we can identify how
                    these subjects became marginal in contemporary discourses. To challenge our own
                    conceptions of the field, we approach sources through a generous taxonomy and
                    metadata structure. If the scholarly source is about women or women-identifying
                    subjects in a substantial way, and intersects with areas of interest to book
                    historians (categorized through the Fields section
                    of the database), it is included. While there are still value judgments in this
                    process, they are more transparent when one strips away obscuring language and
                    the heavy weight of what is really book history. Often work
                    that is within book history in its methods or approach does not use the phrase
                        book history, just as work that is interested in racial power
                    structures does not always signal itself as critical race theory. By
                    looking at what a source does instead of how it positions itself,
                    we have found many more items than anticipated and consequently have had to
                    rethink our definitions of such seemingly concrete ideas as women, the book, textual production, and authorship. Because of its
                    generous approach to source indexing, the WBHB
                    connects sources on women printers in Renaissance Italy to the feminist zines of
                    the late twentieth century in the U.S. to contemporary fantasy print culture in
                    Korea, because all of it is produced by women. The sheer variety and depth of
                    scholarship in this area sits in sharp contrast to how little the field
                    considers the diversity of sources in its major narratives. 
                In other words, to find information on women and the book we had to adjust our
                    assumptions from a field-specific approach to a labor-specific approach. As a
                    result, the data this approach yields suggests one reason that women are
                    difficult to identify in general book history scholarship is a byproduct of the
                    field’s methodological and discursive practices. Anglo-American men are the
                    numerical majority of subjects and are more likely to have their experiences
                    recorded in accessible ways: papers in archives, surviving letters, published
                    memoirs. Since book history itself privileges these documents, men’s experiences
                    dominate how the field is understood. Furthermore, the language of book history,
                    by design, obscures the subject in favor of the object of study and the process
                    by which the object came into being . The
                    unintentional result of this practice is that it is easy to overlook what kinds
                    of subjects are privileged and how the objects of study may be more queered,
                    gendered, and raced than is generally acknowledged.
                Working within and against these discursive practices has an impact on scholars
                    who research women and the book. Looking at the MLA
                        International Bibliography, one can get a sense of some of these
                    issues. We selected two popular subjects as test cases: the book trades and
                    authorship. To keep the numbers at a manageable rate, we also added
                        England as a search term for both. On the MLA, searching for the book trade and England yields
                    314 results. This search was completed on July 23, 2019. Adding in
                    the search term women narrows the number down to 16, not all of which are
                    about women subjects. If one replaces women with men, there are
                    nine sources, even fewer than that of women. This leaves 290 sources that are
                    unmarked by gender. One finds something similar with authorship.
                        Authorship and England yields 323 results, which is narrowed
                    to 49 by including the search term women. An additional 19 are indexed
                    with men. Alternative search terms such as gender do not add to
                    these numbers in significant ways. In both cases, a small proportion of sources
                    are indexed by gender of any presentation. 
                Looking through the remaining sources that are not indexed by the gender of their
                    subject leads to inevitable fatigue. Rarely do women appear in general
                    histories, as the Oxford editions emphasize, and while men’s experiences can be
                    very enlightening for studies on women, they are only occasionally written in a
                    way that acknowledges the limitations of their conclusions. That is, without the
                    presence of non-male subjects, it is uncommon to find an interrogation of the
                    various levels of privilege and authority historical subjects experience that
                    could indicate how women and other minorities fit into these narratives. 
                This may be true for many fields, but it seems a particularly apt
                    characterization of how book history discusses its subjects. The sources we have
                    found on women and the book indicate that when faced with this reality, work on
                    women tends to flag itself as participating in an alternative discourse — it
                    includes the words women,
                    women’s, or gender in the title or as a keyword. More than 60% of
                    the sources in the WBHB are marked by this
                    language. In book history scholarship, to tell the story by women is to
                        position it as the story of women. The same cannot be said of
                    scholarship on male subjects, which, as the MLA
                    examples demonstrate, rarely identifies itself as only about men. It seems that
                    women are either gendered or ignored. As more information is uncovered about
                    women’s roles in the history of the book, this positioning may be less useful
                    than it has been. Future studies of women’s book history may be able to locate
                    with more authority and nuance where the gender of their subjects is and is not
                    a factor in the production of text, as well as when it is a hindrance versus
                    when it is a boon. And as our current society interrogates the usefulness of
                    gender and sex as categories, it is likely that these characterizations will
                    increasingly be assigned to performative categories rather than human features,
                    a further de-evolution from the author-centric model of textual studies.
                        For this observation, we are indebted to informal conversations with Laura
                        C. Mandell and Kathleen Walkup.
                The examples from the MLA replicate a common
                    experience for many researchers, but they also point to a different issue of
                    access: access to the secondary sources. There is a large set of issues
                    surrounding access to secondary work that mimic the challenges of primary
                    sources: paywalls and database subscriptions, the high cost of limited run
                    academic books, and the complicated ethics of services like Academia.edu that tentatively facilitate sharing of information.
                    Another is just finding the sources one is looking for to begin with. This is
                    especially true when comparing what is on the MLA
                    with what actually exists in the field, especially when that field’s definition
                    and values are still unformed. As an example, we compared the sources in the MLA to what we have been able to collect in the WBHB, and the difference is marked. Since all our
                    sources include women, we filtered by England and the subject. For the
                    book trades, our filters yield 178 sources. Compared to the 16 sources that
                    researchers are assured of having from the MLA,
                    this is a significant improvement. Filtering by authorship yields a similar
                    result: while the MLA offered 49 sources for
                    women’s authorship in England, the WBHB has
                    356.
                
                    Numbers are current as of July 2019. 
                    
                        Search Terms
                        MLA International Bibliography
                        WBHB Database
                    
                    
                        Book Trade AND England
                        314
                        --
                    
                    
                        Book Trade AND England AND Men
                        9
                        --
                    
                    
                        Book Trade AND England AND Women
                        16
                        178
                    
                    
                        Authorship AND England
                        323
                        --
                    
                    
                        Authorship AND England AND Men
                        19
                        --
                    
                    
                        Authorship AND England AND Women
                        49
                        356
                    
                
                It is true that no database, including the WBHB, is
                    perfect in its comprehensive surveillance of its intended topic, despite its
                    best efforts. It is also true that the ways in which the MLA indexes sources inhibits visibility when it comes to English
                    women and the book trades and authorship. The disparity between the WBHB and the MLA suggests
                    a key difference in indexing practices. According to its online guidelines, the
                        MLA employs a very broad vocabulary of 68,000
                    words used by a team of professional indexers and selected field bibliographers
                        . The MLA also appears to
                    not retroactively allow keywords to change (nor can we imagine many authors
                    would find value in re-indexing dated scholarship). These are practical
                    decisions, but they mean that listed sources do not always reflect how current
                    scholarship is categorized and understood. Book history is an interdisciplinary
                    field, so it is logical that authors and indexers may not always select the same
                    terms that would link together studies that are truly on the same topics.
                    Scholars may be participating in studies of book history implicitly rather than
                    explicitly (as noted above), or pieces may have been published in an emerging
                    discourse that now goes by another name. Since book history is a relatively new
                    term for a broad and complicated field, it is not wholeheartedly embraced by its
                    practitioners who may see the term as a needless derivative of historical
                    bibliography, limited in its emphasis on the book as a printed codex,
                    oddly fetishizing the material in an increasingly digital world, or less precise
                    for a dozen other reasons. In short, what the field lacks is a set of values
                    that is reflected in a lack of a centralized taxonomy.
                This reality is one that book history shares with other
                        newer disciplines and those that are built on the
                    shifting but powerful interpretations that come from cross-disciplinary work,
                    such as the digital humanities and critical theory. Scholars posing new or
                    differently organized inquiries must do the work of field-building, they must
                    make their own roadmaps, and their own 
                        citational chains
                        
                    . These citational chains
                    are historical, but they are also formative and impact the perception of the
                    field moving forward. The WBHB suggests that
                    digital enumerative bibliography can incorporate the kind of flexible and
                    adaptable indexing practices to address access issues, as well as those that
                    hide women’s work in generalized language. The centralized taxonomy of the
                        Fields list requires subjective editorial
                    intervention, which opens the project up to the murkier areas of bibliographic
                    science. However, users’ ability to filter by empirical data as well as complete
                    full-text searches should ameliorate issues introduced by organizational
                    choices. 
                One project cannot fully alleviate the issues of looking for women in studies
                    that often neglect their histories, and our dataset has its own blind spots,
                    specifically our disciplinary backgrounds and focus on white women in England.
                    However, we do believe that there is power in being counted if for no other
                    reason than it eliminates the perception of work on women and the book as a
                    small and marginal discourse. This points to one of the biggest contributions
                    that digital enumerative bibliography offers fields in formation: the recovery
                    of a history hiding in plain sight. To collect it is to 
                        acknowledge the debt to those who
                            came before; those who helped us find our way when the way was obscured
                            because we deviated from the paths we were told to follow
                        
                    . 
            

                Precarious Histories and Labor
                Collecting secondary sources reveals trends about both our primary subjects and
                    our scholarly treatment of them, our historiography. This project has also
                    foregrounded that issues of access and precarity are not just limited to the
                    sources we index, but the larger infrastructure of digital bibliographic
                    research on marginal subjects and texts. 
                The WBHB has also made clear that issues of access
                    are central to this work, specifically access to secondary sources. While
                    Mandell, Earhart, and others correctly argue that digital recovery efforts are
                    essential to the establishment of minority authors in the literary canon, our
                    project suggests that another step in the digital recovery process, beyond
                    access to primary sources, is greater access to secondary sources. Scholarship
                    becomes discourses, discourses become emergent narratives in monographs and
                    anthologies. Without including secondary sources in recovery efforts, what work
                    there is remains a silent niche rather than a sub-field or even a discipline in
                    its own right. Dominant dialogues remain in place and are functionally
                    re-canonized . This is particularly relevant given
                    the culture wars in academe that have likewise been ongoing since the 1980s and
                    revolve around what constitutes the canon inside the classroom. Canon upholds
                    values of scholarship, and the traditional — until recently, at least —
                    exclusion of writers that are not dead white men has been a crux for both
                    professors and students. While our focus in this essay and elsewhere has been on
                    women writ large (where applicable, we adhere to a constructionist view of
                    female identities), it must not be overlooked that much of the work that has
                    been done so far has been limited to America and Europe. While book history is
                    beginning to look beyond Anglo-European print culture, we particularly want to
                    look forward to studies that genuinely encompass a global perspective rather
                    than giving lip-service to a particular set of strictures and structures.
                Building and maintaining the WBHB also reveals that
                    digital bibliography on precarious subjects can be compounded by the precarity
                    of our own labor. Establishing a digital project while precariously employed
                    creates a substantial set of hurdles, even if these are experiences we share
                    with many other digital humanists . When the WBHB was launched in 2016, we were both doctoral
                    candidates in English at Texas A&M University with little access to the
                    funding and long-term support that digital scholarship, like any scholarship,
                    needs. Due to timing, neither of us was able to incorporate the project
                    explicitly into our dissertations, leading us to produce dissertations
                        and several iterations of a digital project with all the
                    associated headaches and challenges. Until spring 2018, when one editor secured
                    stable employment, it was unclear if the WBHB would
                    outlast our graduate student statuses; we were unable to imagine affording the
                    site maintenance and the time it takes to add sources while adjuncting or doing
                    repeated runs on the job market. 
                As Christina Boyles, Anne Cong-Huyen, Carrie Johnston, Jim McGrath, and Amanda
                    Phillips argue, the labor of digital humanities is by its nature precarious,
                    built on short-term grants and hope that assessment accurately takes into
                    account digital work in a monograph-driven tenure system . The WBHB is
                    no different. The initial project cost a few hundred dollars to buy the domain
                    and the associated costs to run the website for one year. We sorted and produced
                    citation lists through Zotero, which is open-access software. One editor
                    received unexpected supplemental income through the Beth Qualls Endowed
                    Fellowship, which she was able to divert toward the creation of the site.
                    Without the generosity of this donor and the luck of winning this fellowship,
                    the website probably would not exist. Even a couple hundred dollars a year is
                    significant for a graduate student stipend where one is balancing reimbursement,
                    tuition fees and other university costs, and irregular summer funding. Paying
                    out of pocket was not a system we would be able to maintain, especially when one
                    considers the cost of the coding classes and software subscriptions that are
                    necessary to advance beyond Zotero. 
                There were no mechanisms at the time to ask for funding from our home university,
                    since maintenance costs do not fit neatly into any pre-existing category of
                    graduate student funding. CoDHR has since implemented grants for project
                        startup and maintenance. Unable to think of traditional means of
                    securing funding, we took an unconventional approach: selling themed
                    merchandise. Through a link on the site and social media accounts, we promote a
                    digital storefront that sells items on a third-party website, from which we
                    receive $2–$5 depending on the cost of the item. The designs were donated by a
                    generous partner. 
                
                    
                    
                    Image of a gray printed t-shirt.
                
                
                    
                    
                    Image of a white printed t-shirt.
                
                Beyond our expectations, these sales have generated enough funding to pay for
                    site fees in 2018 and 2019, meaning that we have funded our digital humanities
                    project through t-shirts, coffee mugs, and tote bags. Initially, we had some
                    reservations about the appearance of potentially monetizing the site, as well as
                    admitting we had not secured a prestigious line of funding that was common on
                    comparable and aspirational projects. However, we soon found that fellow
                    scholars were not only glad to contribute to our crowdfunding through purchases,
                    but proud to do so: we have observed academics both familiar and unknown, at
                    national and international conferences, sporting our t-shirts, putting our
                    stickers on their phones and laptops, and writing in our notebooks. Women’s book
                    history is not only an emerging field, it is a community that signposts its
                    goals and affiliations through material goods as well as scholarship.
                This process may not be iterable for those without a handy graphic designer and a
                    generous social media following, but the challenges that prompted our move to
                    crowdfunding are ones that tend to be shared amongst those who begin digital
                    humanities projects without access to institutional support. Beyond the
                    challenges of acquiring skills and finding the time to build a project that may
                    not be assessed on the same level as a journal article, there are legitimate
                    reservations about making visible funding sources that are less than
                    prestigious. Projects that do this reveal their own precarity, and there is
                    value that we culturally and professionally place on sources for funding that
                    can affect tenure and promotion, reputation, and respect. Further, crowdfunding
                    and other non-traditional funding sources can exacerbate the lack of stability
                    that Boyles et al. identify. This position has real consequences. As Laura C.
                    Mandell demonstrates, the do-it-yourself model of digital
                    humanities work has yielded a list of dead links and half-finished projects from
                    the 1990s on women writers . These sites
                    are cautionary tales of project planning and maintenance management.
                As Mandell’s analysis emphasizes, the experience of the WBHB does not suggest that crowdfunding should replace traditional,
                    institutionally funded projects because of the associated stability that tends
                    to come with supported scholarship. Instead, it argues that institutions and
                    scholars with secure employment must extend those protections to new digital
                    humanities projects if they encourage their students to pursue such work. What
                    helped the WBHB move from Zotero lists to a
                    database was the support of full-time faculty at Texas A&M who used their
                    influence to secure us practical training, server space, and mentoring. Through
                    a technical assistance grant in 2017, Mandell and the Center of Digital
                    Humanities Research (CoDHR) provided a programmer to convert the database from a
                    MySQL shell into the front end we now use. CoDHR also pledged server space,
                    which alleviated one of the biggest issues projects face and more than anything
                    else ensured the database would continue to survive. 
                Without senior scholars advocating for their students and graduate programs
                    providing long-term support, more projects will not make the transition from
                    graduate student work to sustainability. A sea of new dead links may appear in
                    articles from 2019. When these links are, as Mandell points to, connected to
                    activist scholarship that recuperates marginalized histories and made by
                    precariously employed scholars, the likelihood of this possibility exponentially
                    increases. These dead links will match the sea of dissertations from scholars
                    who were unable to find secure employment and thus never built on such work, a
                    generation of brain power lost to the adjunct crisis. As the academic job market
                    in library sciences and literary studies continues to decline and the future of
                    the National Endowment for the Humanities remains uncertain, the burden is on
                    individual institutions to invest long-term support in projects to keep this
                    data and labor from being lost as much as we have called on them to ethically
                    support their graduates’ employment. 
                Disrupting institutional systems of precarity and access is not the work of a
                    single project, but digital enumerative bibliography can, when managed
                    correctly, disrupt historiographies and recover some of the feminist history
                    lost to the sea of dead links. The historiography we are uncovering in these
                    sources has distinct activist roots; it largely comes from the work of
                    second-wave and third-wave feminism and feminist literary recovery efforts. Of
                    the 1,550 sources currently in the database, around 95% are from 1970 forward,
                    when these movements began to gain traction and produce substantial amounts of
                    scholarship on women and gender. While we hope to find more sources from earlier
                    in the twentieth century, it will involve reimagining, somewhat, our mission of
                    collecting primarily scholarly criticism. Women subjects were less common in the
                        canon of literary criticism, which was challenged
                    through the feminist movement. And prior to the later twentieth century, the
                    number of women scholars in universities was drastically lower. Since the vast
                    majority of the authors in our database are women-identified, it is
                    statistically unlikely we will find the kind of sources we look for before 1930.
                    We may have to adjust our methods of accounting.
                Feminist literary recovery sought to 
                        bring long-lost women writers and
                            their works to light, to bring them into scholarly discourse, and to
                            make their works available to students and scholars
                        
                    . The work in the WBHB is from all three of
                    these foci, especially the last which spawned sustained discussions of feminist
                    textual editing and canon formation. Collecting sources from feminist literary
                    recovery has allowed us to get a picture of the methods and values of this
                    movement as it intersects with material culture. Just as Ezell’s Writing Women’s Literary History [1993] took seriously
                    the impact of feminist literary criticism, this project demonstrates that
                    preserving and analyzing this data can point to the contributions and absences
                    of the movements. The data proves some of the assumed biases of studies in
                    material culture, including the privileging of print over manuscript, public
                    writing over domestic, and what is defined as literary over technical or
                    vocational. 
                Quantitative confirmation of gaps and silences reiterates that even recovery
                    efforts can be limited in scope by ideological barriers. Lillian S. Robinson
                    describes one such obstacle as the desire to recover women’s writing only of a
                    certain sort — what could be described as proto-feminist or maps onto
                    contemporary feminist values. Robinson wonders 
                        Is there a place
                            for research — criticism and scholarship — on women’s literature that,
                            while not being explicitly anti-feminist, nonetheless is not explicitly
                            feminist either?
                        emphasis original
                    . Robinson argues that given the widespread prejudices against women
                    writers in both curriculum and in the scholarship, the answer had to be
                        yes on the grounds that just working on a woman writer was a feminist
                    act in and of itself. We can extend this philosophy to advocate for more work on
                    women’s writing in manuscript, in private, and in non-literary genres. But it
                    also reaches women on the margins of textual production, those who perform
                    occasionally unremarkable but nevertheless universal labor. For instance,
                        mercuries was the gendered term for women distributing pamphlets in
                    the eighteenth century, and while such a trade role may not be labor that
                    necessarily resonates with contemporary feminism, it is still labor whose
                    recovery is a feminist act. Similarly, we cannot safely characterize women in
                    the print house as feminist exceptions, but if we want to recover a historically
                    accurate account of women’s writing and labor, it is to these sites and
                    practices to which we must return.
                The WBHB is an example of digital enumerative bibliography
                    as recuperation — to put the pieces together of a story that has far-reaching
                    implications and powerful resonances. But it is also an attempt to collect
                    sources beyond simple posterity. Feminist recovery requires a shift in the
                    underpinnings of the academic industrial complex, and the data we have collected
                    reveals a pattern of one step forward with two steps back, progress met with
                    backlash. In what Mandell characterizes as 
                        Cycles of Forgetting
                        
                    , digital feminist recovery projects pop up and then quickly lay dormant;
                    an array of teaching anthologies of women poets go out of print with no readily
                    available alternatives; editorial apparatus to texts conspicuously focus on
                    scandalous lives rather than on successful professional careers; close studies
                    of women’s writing bypass bibliographic accuracy. Until this mindset shifts,
                    women are in danger of being forgotten again, and Mandell
                    argues that digital recovery is the best method of disrupting this process . Within this philosophy, the WBHB makes it harder to forget all the groundbreaking
                    work that has been done on women who now fill anthologies, not just the
                    historical subjects themselves. Even when this scholarship falls out of print,
                    through responsible indexing it is not forgotten.
            
