Title:  A Macroscope for Global History: Seshat Global History
                    Databank, a methodological overview
Volume:  010
Issue:  4
Date:  24 October 2016
Abstract:  
                
                This article introduces the Seshat: Global History
                    project, the methodology it is based upon and its potential as a tool for
                    historians and other humanists. Seshat is a comprehensive dataset covering human
                    cultural evolution since the Neolithic. The article describes in detail how the
                    Seshat methodology and platform can be used to tackle big questions that play
                    out over long time scales whilst allowing users to drill down to the detail and
                    place every single data point both in its historic and historiographical
                    context. Seshat thus offers a platform underpinned by a rigorous methodology to
                    actually do longue durée history and the article argues for the
                    need for humanists and social scientists to engage with data driven longue
                        durée history. The article argues that Seshat offers a much-needed
                    infrastructure in which different skill sets and disciplines can come together
                    to analyze the past using long timescales. In addition to highlighting the
                    theoretical and methodological underpinnings, Seshat's potential is demonstrated
                    using three case studies. Each of these case studies is centred around a set of
                    longstanding questions and historiographical debates and it is argued that the
                    introduction of a Seshat approach has the potential to radically alter our
                    understanding of these questions.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                Seshat is the Ancient Egyptian deity of knowledge, writing and scribes. She is
                    depicted working on a scroll but we will probably never know what she is
                    writing. The few images we have of her show the scroll in profile, which is,
                    from a viewers’ perspective, razor thin. Of course, this does not stop us from
                    imagining what Seshat is writing down. Given her twin tasks of keeping a record
                    of the passing of time and surveying the land, we can well imagine the scroll
                    might contain an endless variety of data, ranging from crop yields for
                    individual plots of land to detailed lists of tax revenue arranged by name to
                    the cost of building and maintaining temples. In short, we can imagine the
                    scroll allowing us a means to measure the health of Ancient Egyptian society at
                    any given point in time and link this with exact figures at a range of scales.
                    This is of course a very modern imagination. Calls for tools that allow
                    historical data to be queried equally well at different scales of analysis are
                    proliferating within the world of digital humanities. Tim Hitchcock, for
                    example, defined such macroscopes as: 
                        a visual tool that allows a single data point, to be
                            both visualised at scale in a context of a billion other data points,
                            and drilled down to its smallest compass
                        
                    .Tim Hitchcock’s blog also details how the concept of the
                            macroscope saw life in science fiction, how it was
                        picked up by computer science and how it was in turn introduced to the
                        digital humanities via the work of Katy Börner (Plug-and-Play Macroscopes,
                        Communications of the Association for Computing
                            Machinery 54, no. 3 (2011): 60-69. Most recently it featured in
                        the title of a major book on digital history .
                This article introduces Seshat: Global History
                        Databank as just such a macroscope and thus as a modern and global
                    variant of our imagination of Seshat's scroll. For an overview of the
                        Seshat: Global History Databank initiative and the constituent research
                        projects, see: http://seshatdatabank.info/. For an overview of its methodology
                        aimed at social scientists, see: . Seshat
                    will be a comprehensive dataset covering human cultural evolution since the
                    Neolithic, with a well-defined methodology for interrogating and analyzing the
                    data. Seshat is thus a very powerful tool to tackle big questions that play out
                    over (very) long time scales whilst allowing users to drill down to the detail
                    and place every single data point both in its historic and historiographical
                    context. Seshat offers its users a rigorous methodology to actually do
                        longue durée history. This article argues for the need for
                    humanists and social scientists to engage with such a data driven longue
                        durée history. This article puts forward in detail the Seshat
                    methodology for the reader to grapple with, endorse or criticize. It offers a
                    framework for truly interdisciplinary work integrating history, archaeology,
                    social sciences, evolutionary studies and computer sciences. We also argue that
                    Seshat offers a novel way to connect macro and micro levels of analysis in one
                    framework, that Seshat offers new ways to navigate many of the challenges
                    involved and that Seshat, at the very least, contributes to a better
                    understanding of the issues at stake.
                The article opens with explaining how Seshat fits into the wider intellectual
                    landscape of both the digital humanities and longue durée history.
                    Next, it summarizes the main challenges any macroscope
                    faces and how the awareness of these challenges heavily influenced the
                    architecture of Seshat. The article then introduces Seshat at different levels
                    of abstraction. First, it presents Seshat as a platform for existing and future
                    research projects. Second, it explains in more detail how the connection between
                    the Seshat methodology and one project focusing on the evolution of social
                    complexity has been made. Finally, three short case studies are presented
                    detailing how Seshat can be used to study a range of research questions at
                    different scales of analysis. The article thus moves from the macro to the micro
                    and as such it mimics the zooming in of the macroscope.
            

                Digital humanities and longue durée history
                The availability of computational power and the increase in ease of use of this
                    power is changing history fundamentally as an academic discipline.
                        Computational power has been used in the humanities for several decades and
                        different labels have been used to describe this use, including
                            Computational Humanities and especially the
                        increasingly dominant label Digital Humanities. For an
                        overview of the aims, history, achievements and criticism on the Digital
                        Humanities, see:  and . This is most evident in the ever larger historical data sets
                    available to historians, the relative ease with which these data sets can be put
                    together, linked and shared, and the increased popularity of relatively new, for
                    humanists, types of analysis and visualization, ranging from distant reading,
                    over statistical and spatial analysis, to mathematical and computational
                        modelling. There are several important initiatives to bring together
                        different datasets in one framework and provide the user with novel ways to
                        query and engage with these. An excellent example of such an initiative for
                        a specific time and location is the London Lives project that brings
                        together eight archives and fifteen datasets for the period 1690-1800 in one
                        framework: http://www.londonlives.org/. The rise of the
                        digital pushes historians into new areas of research
                    and away from micro histories centering around well understood archives, texts,
                    datasets and linked to relatively short time scales and played out in relatively
                    small places. The digital also leads to a profound change in how historians
                    conduct research. There is a shift away from lone scholars and toward
                    collaborative work where different collaborators bring different skill sets and
                    knowledge to the table ranging from domain expertise and close reading skills,
                    to synthesizing abilities and analytical skills.
                 This profound impact of computational power and the digital
                    on historiography is most notable in the emerging revival of the study of change
                    over (very) long time scales. Whereas the exact time scale can differ if
                    historians embrace Big History, Deep History, write the history of the
                    Anthropocene or embrace the temporally less defined longue durée
                    history, it is clear that historians have begun to embrace longer time scales
                        
                    
                    
                    . Of all the terms referring to the study of
                        change over long timescales, the concept of longue durée
                        history is arguably the one historians are most familiar with. Fernand
                        Braudel’s classic 1958 article in which he presents his view on the
                        contribution of the longue durée’ on the discipline of history
                        is still a valuable starting point . The
                            longue durée has been most famously championed by the
                        Annales School of historical writing and this to the extent that both
                        concepts are heavily intertwined. For a history of the Annales School, and
                        thus the importance of the longue durée, see the classic
                        account by Peter Burke . Although the
                    plethora of recent calls to arms for studying history over longer time scales
                    has not yet been matched by an equally rich body of literature actually studying
                    change over such time scales, the debate about its value, methodology and the
                    challenges faced has definitely been opened. The expectations of proponents of
                    the longue durée are sky high. In their History Manifesto, for example, Jo Guldi and David Armitage see
                    engaging with the longue durée as the way for historians to regain
                    an authoritative voice in the public debate, as the way to speak truth to power
                    and thus to restore the influence of history as an academic discipline . Whereas they passionately put forward
                    this vision, how exactly it can be achieved is much less clear and this lack of
                    specifics contributed greatly to the debate following the publication of their
                    volume 
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    .
                As long as there are no clear methodologies to offer on how to do longue
                        durée history the debate between proponents and sceptics of
                        longue durée history will not move forward. As long as there
                    are no standards on how to put together structured time series which work
                    equally well for, let's say, the Neolithic, the Axial Age or the modern period
                    few historians will actively engage with longue durée history. As
                    long as there is no framework which connects macro and micro levels of analysis
                    historians will be worried that the longue durée is in part
                    inspired by a (social) science envy and that the tool kit of advanced
                    statistical models is not as well suited to discovering meaning as well as the
                    humanists' skill sets centered around close reading and reading against the
                    grain, honed over decades of practice . Will there
                    be a place for the small in the rush for the big, the long, or the global? 
                    . This scepticism is also coupled with a
                        turn fatigue. Has the longue durée, which
                    cannot be but heavily intertwined with the digital and
                        global turns, more staying power than the previously
                    equally hyped cultural, linguistic and
                        spatial turns? This healthy criticism has greatly
                    informed the methodological set-up of Seshat. More specifically, the methodology
                    of Seshat was defined to address the following challenges: 
                
                    How do we ensure that a macroscope like Seshat allows analyses at multiple
                        scales? 
                    How do we make sure that Seshat is not only producing interesting looking
                        visualisations but also allows users to engage with crucial research
                        questions and long standing historiographical debates?
                    How can we make sure Seshat not only engages with existing debates but
                        also allows for new questions to be asked?
                    How can we ensure that Seshat not only points out connections and
                        influences but also brings real explanatory power to the table?
                    How can we assure that Seshat works equally well for understanding the
                        gaps in our knowledge and data sets as it works for visualizing our
                        knowledge?
                    How can we assure that the much touted interdisciplinarity does not mean
                        in practice a social sciences project with a humanist touch? 
                    How can we ensure the intellectual staying power of Seshat by linking with
                        the core task of the historian: explaining change over time?
                    How can we strike a balance between the need for universal or regional
                        models and place and time specific historical data?
                    How can we assure data quality given the massive amount of data and the
                        very large numbers of collaborators?
                
            

                Philosophy and architecture of Seshat
                Seshat is neither the only nor the first research infrastructure project focusing
                    on historical Big Data. There are quite a number of impressive infrastructure
                    projects each with their own distinct and often complementary philosophy and
                    methodology, and each addressing different user needs. For example, in terms of
                    the volume of historical data the Europeana project and the Hathi Trust Digital Library bring together unrivalled amounts of
                    historical data. Other projects or platforms welcome individual researchers to
                    contribute their own dataset and provide help with data management requirements
                    (e.g. tDAR - The Digital Archaeological
                        Record) or provide a platform to link different geo-historical
                    datasets (e.g. Système
                            modulaire de gestion de l’information historique –
                        SyMoGIH). The goal of the very impressive CHIA Collaborative
                    for Historical Information and Analysis and the associated World-Historical
                    Dataverse project is to bring together existing datasets focusing on the past
                    five hundred years (http://www.chia.pitt.edu/; http://www.dataverse.pitt.edu/).. For a broad overview of the
                        overall intellectual agenda driving the CHIA Collaborative for Historical
                        Information and Analysis and the World Historical Dataverse, see: . Finally, although founded in 1949, the
                        Human Relation Area Files - HRAF
                        project still stands out because of its ambition to bring together a
                    very substantial collection of ethnographies and it offers users interested in
                    cross-cultural research added value by providing an entry into the data through
                    a well developed subject classification system. Seshat too offers a very
                    distinctive methodology which is detailed below and which is geared towards
                    specific and quite different user needs. To the best of our knowledge only the
                    more recent Vancouver based Database of Religious History project shares broadly similar aims to
                    Seshat but addresses these in different ways and focuses exclusively on the
                    sub-domain of religion.
                The aim of Seshat is to be the premier port of call for rigorously testing
                    theories with historical and archaeological data. Using Seshat involves a major
                    shift in research practice for historians. Most current historiography aims to
                    offer new explanations by engaging intensively with existing historiography.
                    Borrowing, endorsing, modifying or challenging existing explanations lies at the
                    core of the historical profession. Adding one additional and more convincing
                    explanation based upon a novel connection between theory and data, stemming from
                    the use of new archival material or a fuller mastery of the sources, the
                    application of more sophisticated analogies, or a superior reading against the
                    grain of the sources is seen as the hallmark of the historian. Seshat enables us
                    to turn this logic around. By embracing the scientific method the principal goal
                    is not necessarily to add one additional explanation but rather to weed out
                    existing explanations which fail on empirical grounds. Seshat enables us to
                    point out the limited explanatory power of existing theories and thus to discard
                    them in preference to other theories with greater explanatory power. By thus
                    reducing the number of theories the aim is to reach temporary consensus about
                    one or a few stronger explanations until new data or new types of analysis
                    restart this process of relative consensus building. A classic example of
                        a debate where it would be useful to reduce the number of theories is the
                        debate regarding the fall of the Roman Empire. For an introduction to the
                        large number of theories, see: .
                Seshat stores data for theoretically motivated variables for a number of units of
                    analysis linked to groups. For an introduction to part of the code book
                        and to many of the clusters of variables Seshat stores data for, see the
                        Supporting Material of . The list of
                    variables and the hypotheses and predictions these variables allow to test are
                    put together during the initial stages of a research project and are thus
                    declared before the start of data analysis.For an example of some the
                        theories and hypotheses pertaining to ritual that will be tested see . The units of analysis include
                    polities, quasi-polities, sub-polities, NGAs (or Natural Geographic
                    Areas of roughly 100 by 100 kilometers with a relative uniform environment),
                    cities, religious traditions and, allowing for a high degree of flexibility,
                    interest groups such as bands of warriors, trading companies, or religious cults
                        . It is possible to add further to
                    this initial list of units of analysis. All data in Seshat is query-able both
                    temporally and spatially and it is therefore possible to bring together data
                    linked to the different units of analysis. Temporally the smallest time step the
                    data can be queried for is a year. Spatially all data will be linked to a GIS
                    shapefile taking the form of a point, a line or a free form polygon (e.g. the
                    border of a polity or the border of an area in which a certain ritual is
                    performed). This allows, for example, for pulling up a data sheet for hundreds
                    of variables for each individual year of the lifespan of a polity whilst linking
                    this data to the geographic extent of the polity for that year. Thus, when using
                    Seshat fully zoomed in data can be viewed at a granularity of one year for a
                    single geographic location. When using Seshat fully zoomed out its temporal
                    scope encompasses the neolithic to the present and its geographic scope is
                    global. The main challenge when using Seshat to analyze data over long periods
                    of time or from large geographic areas is to make sure that the variables work
                    equally well for units of analysis from very different time periods or
                    geographic areas. This is achieved through an extensive feedback process between
                    variables and data early on in the lifetime of a project. For example, in
                        order to ensure that the variables worked equally well for all periods in
                        the Upper Egypt time series there was an extensive process of feedback
                        between variables and data and between experts and research assistants. The
                        first phase of this process was a two-year long dialogue between Egypt
                        scholars (John Baines, Elizabeth Frood, and Joseph Manning) and Seshat
                        editors and research assistants. In a second phase a workshop was organized
                        in which the gathered data was discussed and assessed by a range of Egypt
                        scholars (John Baines, Juan Carlos Moreno-Garcia, Brendan Haug, Andrey
                        Korotayev, Joseph Manning, and Julia Zinkina). Another key challenge
                    is to ensure that Seshat works equally well for data-rich as for data-poor
                    periods and areas. Seshat has been configured in a number of ways to ensure that
                    data from data-poor periods and areas can still be queried successfully and that
                    a comparison with data-rich periods or areas is meaningful. Firstly, the Seshat
                    data model treats the presence of a certain trait or feature, its absence, and
                    even the unknownness whether a trait or feature was present
                    or absent as equally valuable information which can all be used for statistical
                    analysis. Secondly, Seshat employs the approach in which a certain fundamental
                    variable is proxied by a number of other, more easily
                    observable measures. A certain degree of redundancy resulting from this approach
                    is a design feature. Even though some proxies cannot be coded, due to lack of
                    information, typically other proxies for the same underlying variable may be
                    available. This information can be used in a statistical analysis to make
                    inferences about the underlying variable even under situations of many missing
                    data. As long as there is some data on some proxies it is therefore still
                    possible to put together a time series reflecting the dynamics of the
                    fundamental variable we wish to study. Modern methods of statistical analysis,
                    such as multiple imputation , allow us to make valid
                    inferences about the dynamics of historical variables, as long as at least some
                    of the proxies are known. 
                 Each variable generates three types of data. First, each variable has a machine
                    readable bit of code which is most typically a number or an
                        absent/present/unknown/no data code. This machine
                    readable code can reflect levels of uncertainty about the data (e.g. domain
                    experts do not know the exact date when a certain feature emerged but agree that
                    it emerged in a certain date range) and levels of disagreement among scholars on
                    the data and its interpretation. Second, each variable is tied to a short (often
                    a paragraph or two) descriptive text which explains the code, qualifies the
                    levels of uncertainty and disagreement, and provides the reader with the
                    necessary contextual information and historiographical background. Taken
                    together these descriptive texts can be read very much like an encyclopaedia
                    entry in which a polity or archaeological sub tradition is introduced to the
                    reader in a structured format. The texts thus summarize in a structured way
                    often very large historiographies which allows the reader to appreciate the
                    depth of knowledge on polities, archaeological sub-traditions,
                    NGAs, or, conversely, understand better the gaps in knowledge.
                    Finally, the data is tied via a series of footnotes to the literature (scholarly
                    books and articles, generally the secondary and tertiary literature) which
                    allows the reader to contextualize every single data point even further by
                    providing links to the most recent historiography. As the data will be
                    periodically augmented to reflect new insights the descriptive texts and
                    footnotes will also reflect the evolution in our collective understanding of any
                    of Seshat’s units of analysis.
                Data is uploaded into Seshat in three different ways. Data can be uploaded
                    directly by domain experts like historians, archaeologists or religious studies
                    scholars. Ultimately each data point will receive input from more than one
                    domain expert. Reflecting the endorsements, challenges or debate among domain
                    experts is a crucial aspect of the descriptive text. Experts are also used to
                    lend authority to obvious codes on which there is no
                    scholarly debate but for which it is impossible to find a reference (e.g. we
                    code the prevalence of gun powder in the section on military technology
                    variables as absent for the neolithic period). Secondly
                        low-hanging fruit data which can be identified through
                    a short engagement with the literature is uploaded by research assistants. This
                    data is then presented to one or more domain experts to be approved, augmented,
                    qualified or rejected. Thirdly, an impressive range of digital tools are being
                    developed to help both experts and research assistants to populate data fields
                    more quickly. These tools are developed as part of the ALIGNED quality-centric, software and data
                            engineering project (funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020
                        research and innovation programme under grant agreement No. 644055;
                        aligned-project.eu). These tools focus upon managing the metadata,
                        incorporating existing structured data into Seshat, and creating candidates
                        from unstructured data/text. A full suite of tools is anticipated to be
                        operational by early 2018. All current Seshat data has been gathered either
                        by domain experts uploading the data directly or by research assistants
                        working under close supervision of a series of domain experts. These
                    tools, especially web scrapers which query very large data collections like
                    Jstor or Google Books for likely candidates - i.e. paragraphs or pages which
                    will most likely contain relevant information on a certain variable – will be an
                    integral part of Seshat. By integrating these tools within the Seshat
                    environment experts and research assistants can cut speedily through very large
                    historiographies. By keeping track of which candidates were helpful and which
                    candidates were mere noise for each variable the algorithms underpinning the
                    process of candidate generation will improve progressively over time.
                Although at heart a digital humanities and social sciences project Seshat
                    deliberately embraces computational power and thus computer science at all
                    stages of the research process. This sustained engagement with computer science
                    is not done through a piecemeal approach of adopting a specific technology for
                    every step of the research process but by underpinning Seshat with the Dacura
                    data curation platform. Dacura is a data curation system developed by the
                        Knowledge and Data Engineering Group at Trinity College Dublin that provides
                        support for collaborative e-Research applications such as dataset
                        collection, maintenance and publication on the web as Linked Data. Further
                        information is available at the Dacura website, http://www.dacura.scss.tcd.ie or for technical details see . Dacura provides a platform upon which to
                    build an integrated Seshat environment for data gathering, data storage, data
                    querying and exporting, and data analysis and visualization. The database itself
                    is a triple store using Linked Data/RDF technology. The digital tools used to
                    facilitate the data gathering process will be integrated into the Seshat
                    environment. Specific work environments are set up for the different types of
                    Seshat users, including work environments for the editor, the domain-experts,
                    the research assistants, and the volunteers. All metadata reflecting the
                    research process (e.g. who uploaded what data when, who augmented, challenged
                    the data, which tools were used) is captured, analyzed and used to improve the
                    data gathering process. For example, it will be possible to assess the quality
                    of the data gathered, on a per-variable basis, with the help of the digital
                    tools. Getting a grip on these metrics is essential to fine tune the processes
                    or algorithms that produce low quality data. Seshat data is accessible through a
                    number of different outputs including table format and a browse-able wiki-style
                    text-based web page version of the dataset. Whereas the table format invites the
                    users to statistically analyze and visualize the data, the text version opens up
                    the data for a reading and browsing centered exploration and thus allows for a
                    more serendipitous research process. Finally, as Seshat is using Linked Data
                    technology, the data can be linked to other databases with either different
                    units of analysis or using a different granularity. For an introduction of
                        the potential of Linked Data technology, see  and
                        for deployment guidelines for humanities and social sciences research
                        projects, see . For some examples of Arts,
                        Humanities and Social Sciences projects making good use of Linked Data
                        technology, see: the British Museum collections site and the Netherlands Institute for
                        Sound and Vision’s DIVE event-based browsing of historical media collections
                        online at: http://dive.beeldengeluid.nl/ As a result, Seshat data
                    can be easily linked to external data sets and also functions as an entry point
                    into other historical data sets.
            

                The evolution of social complexity
                 Seshat is currently used to test a range of research questions, and associated
                    hypotheses and predictions. Current projects using Seshat focus on the evolution
                    of social complexity, on the possible historical deep roots of areas that today
                    experience the greatest economic growth and political stability, and on the role
                    axial age religions play in explaining social inequality. The evolution of
                        social complexity and the role agricultural productivity, warfare and ritual
                        played in this evolution, is studied as part of the Ritual, Community, and Conflict research project
                        (ESRC, UK). The analysis of the deep roots of technologically advanced areas
                        is funded through the research project The Deep Roots of the Modern World:
                                Investigating the Cultural Evolution of Economic Growth and
                                Political Stability (Tricoastal Foundation). The role
                        axial age religions play in explaining social inequality is at the centre of
                        the research project Axial-Age Religions and the Z-curve of Human
                                Egalitarianism (John Templeton Foundation). In
                    this section, we focus on the project studying the evolution of social
                    complexity as this project is furthest advanced and therefore well suited to
                    illustrate how to move from an overall research question to a specific data
                    gathering strategy.
                Over the past decades a range of explanations of human
                        ultrasociality - our ability to cooperate with genetically unrelated
                    individuals - have been proposed . Many of the
                    explanations favour the resource base as the main driver behind the evolution of
                    social complexity. Others focus on the role of warfare and others still stress
                    the role rituals play in producing social cohesion. Systematic empirical
                    research has been lacking to test the strength of these explanations. By using
                    Seshat we want to compare the explanatory power of each of these theories
                    head-on by testing them with systematically collated historical and
                    archaeological data. For this purpose over 600 theoretically motivated variables
                    focusing on social complexity, resources, warfare and ritual have been selected.
                    Data is collected for each of the variables for each year for as far back in
                    time as possible. For the Konya Plain for example this means that data is
                    collected for over 9000 years. For other areas, like Iceland, the time series is
                    much shorter. As the greatest explanatory power for this type of research
                    question lies in studying change over time this particular project did not
                    compromise on the temporal dimension and it aimed at collecting as long a time
                    series as possible. Depending on the specific research question it is possible
                    to limit the temporal coverage. In order to achieve a satisfactory geographic
                    coverage within the lifespan of the grant supporting this project, we have
                    focused on collecting data for a widely spread sample, based around 30 Natural
                    Geographic Areas, which cover more than 400 historical polities. For each of
                    these NGAs data has been gathered for the full lifespan of every polity or
                    archaeological sub culture which was present in or ruled over the NGA. Two
                    parameters shaped the selection of the sample of 30 Natural Geographic Areas.
                    Firstly, the globe was divided into 10 large world zones (e.g. North America or
                    the Indian subcontinent) and for each zone 3 NGAs have been selected. Secondly,
                    these three NGAs for every world zone contain one NGA where social complexity
                    rose very early, one NGA with a very shallow history of social complexity, and
                    one NGA with an intermediate history of social complexity. As a result the world
                    sample of 30 contains NGAs with a very long history of social complexity like
                    Upper Egypt, Mesopotamia and Middle Yellow River Valley and NGAs with a much
                    more shallow history of state formation like Iceland. For NGAs with a long
                    tradition of social complexity this means that we are coding on average 30
                    polities. For NGAs where social complexity is a relative recent arrival this can
                    yield as little as four or five polities.For example, for the Upper Egypt
                        NGA Seshat contains data for 39 polities and for the Kachi Plain NGA Seshat
                        has data for 25 polities, whilst for the Big Island Hawaii NGA Seshat only
                        contains data for five polities. Taken together these thirty time
                    series represent a very large data set which allows us to test the selected
                    hypotheses and predictions in a statistically rigorous way.
                Whereas the paragraphs above detail how a project can make full use of the Seshat
                    infrastructure to collect data, the focus of the following sections shifts from
                    the how to the why and provides three
                    examples of questions that can be better understood through Seshat. Especially
                    the relevance of having access to large structured datasets that can be queried
                    on different timescales and how this allows the scholar to engage differently
                    and with confidence with some of the big historiographical debates will be
                    highlighted. Together these three case studies showcase the relevance of Seshat
                    for historiographical debates playing out at different time and geographical
                    scales.
            

                Testing Theories about the Evolution of Economic Growth and Political
                    Stability 
                 The first example of such a big debate - and a debate taking into account long
                    timescales globally – focuses on the historic roots of the staggering degree of
                    inequality in economic performance and effectiveness of governance among nations
                    that we see today. Understanding the causes of these disparities is one of the
                    greatest intellectual puzzles in the social sciences and the humanities. While
                    there is broad agreement about the empirical patterns (which countries are rich
                    and stable, and which are poor and/or prone to political instability), causal
                    mechanisms responsible for these patterns are much in dispute. Economists have
                    traditionally emphasized capital accumulation and technological progress, as
                    well as policies and incentives affecting factor accumulation and innovation
                        . In more recent years, the attention has shifted
                    to the institutional framework , with some economists
                    arguing that economic growth and material improvement can only occur by
                    developing inclusive institutions enabling broad sections of the population to
                    participate in economic and political activities .
                    The historical development of particular institutions can have far-reaching
                    consequences .
                On the other hand, some argue that there is a direct effect of geography on
                    economic growth, focusing on such mechanisms as disease burdens . Others have highlighted an indirect effect of
                    biogeographic conditions on current wealth, mediated by the timing of the
                    agricultural revolution in different regions . More
                    recently, economists have gained new insights on these issues by focusing on the
                    ancestral composition of current populations. In particular, Spolaore and
                    Wacziarg have emphasized the historical roots of long-term barriers to the
                    diffusion of innovations in modern times . What
                    many of these approaches have in common is that they are looking to the past to
                    explain today’s inequality in economic performance and effectiveness of
                    governance.
                Modern evolutionary theory provides a new way of thinking about economic issues
                        
                    . Explaining change over time (and thus
                    historical data) lie at the heart of this approach. Modern evolutionary theory
                    can also act as a unifying framework allowing us to synthesize different
                    perspectives on political and economic development and design empirical tests of
                    competing hypotheses. Political and economic development are intimately linked
                    and can be seen as two different manifestations of the same deep structural
                    process — building viable states and vibrant economies requires huge numbers of
                    people to cooperate on a very large scale . The
                    ability of humans to cooperate in huge groups of genetically unrelated
                    individuals, or ultrasociality
                    
                     is on a scale not seen elsewhere in nature. A key
                    aspect has been the cultural evolution of norms and institutions 
                    
                     which are characterized by a tension between the
                    benefits they yield at the higher level of social organization and the costs
                    borne by lower-level units . However, this insight
                    raises further important questions: How do these institutions develop over time?
                    Do political institutions precede or follow changes in economic institutions?
                    Ultimately what ecological and historical factors favour the evolution of
                    ultrasocial institutions? To what extent are there universal features of
                    successful political and economic systems? How do these institutions spread?
                We have many theories purporting to explain economic growth and political
                    stability, thus, but there is little consensus about which of them are correct
                    (or which combination of postulated mechanisms provides the best explanation of
                    the observed patterns). Adjudicating between competing theories of economic
                    performance in a more rigorous and systematic way is critical and this is where
                    the value of Seshat lies. Thus far theories of long-term political and economic
                    development have not been thoroughly tested because we lack data of suitable
                    quantity and quality. Two main problems prevented adopting a Seshat approach in
                    the past. The first problem that plagued previous empirical analyses is the use
                    of modern states as geographical units, even though they may have little
                    relation to historically appropriate units of analysis. For example, one of the
                    spatial units in the database of historical GDP estimates, constructed by Angus
                    Maddison , is the USSR. This territory is a very
                    inconvenient unit of analysis for any historical period before the Russian
                    Empire emerged as a Great Power during the eighteenth century.
                The second problem is how to deal with time. Existing databases suffer from a
                    variety of limitations. Some of the best ethnographic resources, (e.g. the
                    Standard Cross-Cultural Sample, eHRAF World Cultures) are cross-sectional and
                    lack time-depth, while good data on institutions is generally only available for
                    modern societies (e.g. the Political Risk Services database looks back only to
                    the 1980s). Yet to understand causal mechanisms of long-term persistence and
                    reverses we need systematic, long-term dynamic data that tell us how different
                    aspects of societies change with time. Resources that try to overcome these
                    problems are limited to archaeological data (e.g. eHRAF Archaeology), or are
                    constructed by social scientists interested in testing particular theories
                    (e.g., Polity IV). These data yield valuable insights but the number of cases or
                    the time span that can be coded is limited. Additionally, these social
                    scientists are not experts on the societies they code, and thus their databases
                    do not reflect the best current knowledge of expert historians. A similar
                    limitation applies to the full-text HRAF collections, which require researchers
                    to code variables themselves. Some intrepid social scientists have attempted to
                    include deep history in their analyses. For example, Comin and co-authors  investigated how technological development in 1500 CE
                    (and before that around 1 CE and 1000 BCE) affected the wealth of modern
                    nations. Thompson and Sakuwa look even deeper in time, to 8000 BC . These authors should be commended for attempting
                    to research the deep historical roots of modern economic growth. However, the
                    jumps between 8000 BC and 1000 BC, or even between 1 CE and 1500 CE are huge.
                    Much interesting history happened during these periods, but practical databases
                    that allow to include these developments into analyses have been lacking in the
                    past. 
                Seshat will allow scholars to contrast how well rival theories predict
                    trajectories of actual historical societies in many different regions of the
                    world (and over many different historical periods). Those theories whose
                    predictions are less supported by the data compared to the predictions
                    associated with rival theories will lose their appeal and as empirical evidence
                    against them accumulates, will be rejected. Our understanding of today’s
                    inequality in economic performance and effectiveness of governance will thus be
                    on a much firmer footing using Seshat. 
            

                Locating Egyptian history in a global historical context
                The second debate – how to place Egypt in the historical context of the wider
                    region (and indeed globally) – has a more specific timeframe and geographical
                    scope. Egypt has always had an unusual position within the field of History.
                    Broad cultural description has dominated the literature, rather than, for
                    example, an institutional analysis of Egyptian agriculture or the building of a
                    model of the pharaonic economy. See e.g. the economic analysis of the
                        origins of agriculture in Egypt in . For one
                        proposed model of the pharaonic economy, see . As a result of Egyptology’s general (there are important
                    exceptions) reluctance to engage more broadly, the big question in
                    macro-historical terms – whether we can characterize Egyptian civilization as
                    African, Mediterranean, or Near Eastern – is still open for debate. Cultural
                    approaches have left a good deal of historical change over time unaccounted for.
                    Traditionally, for example, the entire first millennium BCE, a time when outside
                    groups politically dominated Egypt, has been neglected. That has begun to change
                    thankfully. To be sure Egypt was isolated from the Mediterranean by its main
                    environmental engine, the annual flood of the Nile driven by the monsoonal
                    rainfall in East Africa which was subject to considerable variability for
                    several climatological reasons . The Nile flood, not
                    the king, was the real despot in Egypt. But the interactions between Egypt, the
                    Near East and the Mediterranean world were both complex and important and in
                    many cases were drivers of important change within Egyptian civilization (e.g.
                    The Hyksos domination of Egypt in the 17th and 16th centuries BCE, and Greek
                    dominance from the late 4th to the end of the 1st centuries BCE, to name two
                    obvious cases). 
                In order to start answering the question of Egypt’s place within the wider region
                    and in the context of global history we need to access the existing historical
                    data in a format very different from that which drives much of the scholarship:
                    the organization of the chronology by ruling families, or dynasties established
                    by the Egyptian priest Manetho in the third century BCE. The Seshat project, by
                    aggregating all knowable data across a very wide range of variables, allows us
                    precisely to question the conventional chronology and ask new questions. Can the
                    dynastic chronology be replaced by a new convincing data driven chronology? Can
                    we introduce a more dynamic chronology by merging different timescales? As
                    Seshat brings the work of very different specialists together into one framework
                    it is possible to analyze causal inferences between very different variables and
                    place Egypt within a world civilization framework from which it will be easy to
                    compare civilizations over time and space. For the first time we will be able to
                    see how Egypt compares to the classical world synchronically, or to other
                    places, and at the same scale. This will allow historians to ask very important
                    questions in comparative history. For example, were Egyptians of the fourth
                    century BCE worse off than their counterparts in Athens? This is an important,
                    perhaps one of THE important questions in comparative history of the ancient
                    world - what was the role of institutions in economic performance? Were people
                    better off in one political system versus another? This question, for the
                    ancient world, has received renewed attention in recent years. Almost all of
                    this attention has been focused on the classical world. The argument comes down
                    to an institutional one: did Greek society, usually with a heavy emphasis on
                    Athens, create a wider distribution of wealth, i.e. was the distribution of
                    wealth more equal than in societies governed by non-democratic institutions? Did
                    this in in turn lead to greater sustained real economic growth?  Did religion or bureaucracy act as breaks to social
                    development? And what about abrupt climate change and disease?
                 As the potential riches for understanding Egyptian history offered by the Seshat
                    approach are evident, this begs the question why this has not been attempted
                    before. What are the factors that prohibited the adoption of such an approach in
                    the past? The most important reason is that, as in other areas of humanistic
                    research, Egyptian history has been a text-based field, and the texts, covering
                    four stages of the language and three different scripts from the origins of
                    Egyptian civilization to the Roman conquest, are often difficult. This leads to
                    specialization in particular historical periods or phases of Egyptian history.
                    The assessment of change over time is more often left to archaeologists, whose
                    work is often separated from the language-based studies of traditional
                    historians. Often still, very good archaeological results have not been
                    integrated into historical narratives about Egypt. Needless to say understanding
                    change over time can be obscured, or simply missed, by such text-based
                    approaches.
                 A very large amount of data has currently been entered into the Seshat database
                    for the full sweep of polities that were present or ruled Egypt from the
                    Neolithic until the Ottoman Empire. Seshat, by its very nature, thus clarifies
                    what we know, what we do not know and what is still debated among scholars, and
                    it highlights the range of evidence that is problematic, disputed and so on.
                    Seeing the total picture of what we do and do not know about these polities,
                    highlighted by comparing the data with data from other places, forces one to
                    think in novel ways about causality. The preliminary results in analyzing this
                    data will be valuable in setting new research agendas. As these research agendas
                    connect historians with their core business of explaining change over time
                    rather than updating existing explanations with the latest intellectual fashion
                    the longue durée has staying power and is thus different from most
                    other turns. The Seshat project has already revealed the potential for
                    completely rewriting Egyptian history by assembling an unprecedented and vast
                    number of socioeconomic, political and agrarian variables. Being confronted with
                    this data in conjunction with other civilizations, say for example China,
                    essentially the totality of what we do and do not know about ancient Egypt over
                    several millennia, forces the historian to reconsider why and how Egypt matters
                    in a more global context. The result will allow us to map novel connections
                    between, for example, kings, fiscal institutions and society and it will allow
                    us to identify the unique Egyptian solutions to establishing a political
                    equilibrium. 
            

                Modes of religiosity theory in historical context
                The third case study demonstrates the usefulness of Seshat for testing theories
                    in the social sciences with historical data. Such data often pertain to
                    particular behaviours occurring in regionally and temporarily bounded groups.
                    This case study demonstrates that Seshat is not about aggregating out, and thus
                    reducing, all data to the level of general trends at the overall polity level.
                    This case study thus highlights the vital importance of
                        small data, the importance of the specific context of
                    data to understand key processes in history, and thus represents a macroscope
                    well zoomed in.
                Scholars have long appreciated that participating in collective rituals increases
                    group cohesion but social scientists are still only beginning to understand how
                    and why rituals have these effects. One of the most empirically productive new
                    developments in this area is known as the theory of modes of
                        religiosity or simply the modes theory
                    
                    
                    
                    . This theory maintains that collective rituals
                    tend to cluster around two poles in terms of their frequency and emotionality:
                    that is, they tend to be either highly routinized and relatively low in
                    affective intensity (high-frequency, low-arousal or HFLA
                    rituals) or rarely enacted and emotionally arousing (low-frequency, high-arousal
                    or LFHA rituals). 
                HFLA rituals often form the core practices of large organizations, such as world
                    religions or popular movements. Because the creed and its behavioural
                    prescriptions are highly routinized they form part of people’s general knowledge
                    of what to believe and how to act in order to be an upstanding group member.
                    Such knowledge is stored in semantic memory – a collection of
                    somewhat abstract schemas comprising the group’s belief system together with a
                    set of general procedural scripts for its distinctive practices. These scripts
                    and schemas represent actors and believers as generic group members rather than
                    as particular individuals and so motivate a form of group alignment known as
                        identification that is essentially depersonalizing. Since the
                    group’s identity markers are enshrined in dogma they can be spread quite easily
                    by gifted orators and through the profusion of more or less sacred texts. Belief
                    systems of this kind can harden into orthodoxies that are more or less
                    systematically policed through hierarchical and centralized authority
                    structures. Thus, HFLA rituals are linked to a series of other features, both
                    psychological and social, ranging from group identification, rapid spread,
                    standardization of dogma, sanctions for unauthorized innovation, and large,
                    centralized systems of top-down control. This clustering of features has been
                    labeled the 
                        doctrinal mode of religiosity
                        
                     but it is not restricted to religious groups and has more recently been
                    shown to characterize the formation and spread of many large-scale secular
                    groups as well .
                LFHA rituals are commonly found in small-scale traditional societies, for example
                    in the form of arduous initiations. Rituals involving traumatic or painful
                    ordeals are thought to foster a visceral feeling of oneness, known as
                        fusion with the group . In
                    contrast with the depersonalizing effects of identification, fused individuals
                    have an almost heightened sense of personal agency when the group is salient –
                    indeed they describe themselves as being strengthened by the group just as they,
                    in turn, believe that they make the group strong .
                    Fusion is prevalent in small face-to-face groups that have gone through
                    dysphoric experiences together – it is associated with the bonds of kinship in
                    family groups  but also in military units,
                    sports teams, gangs, and other local groups that have a strong sense of shared
                    fate . Fusion is thought to result from the sharing of
                    especially salient life-changing events – the sort of experiences that define
                    who you are as a person and that, when shared with others, seem to break down
                    the boundary between the personal and the social self. Unlike identification,
                    fusion is therefore rooted in episodic rather than semantic memories . The distinct episodes that shape the personal
                    self are felt to have shaped also the group, such that these unique experiences
                    are equally defining for both. When people fuse with a group in this way they
                    experience any kind of threat to the group as a personal attack and this
                    motivates willingness to fight and die to protect group members . Early research on the effects of dysphoric ritual on
                    episodic memory and social cohesion tended to focus on the religious rituals of
                    small-scale societies, labeled the imagistic mode of religiosity
                    . But as with the doctrinal mode, these imagistic
                    practices are found in highly fused secular groups as well, especially those
                    engaged in risky intergroup conflict. It is thought that the reason why
                    dysphoric initiations are so common in warring tribes and modern armies is
                    precisely because they fuse military units together, creating more motivated
                    fighters. Recent research on both conventional forces and insurgent groups
                    supports this view .
                Much research on the modes theory has focused on the proximate mechanisms linking
                    processes of memory formation to patterns of group alignment and social
                    organization. But the theory also raises questions of ultimate causation: What
                    are the functions of LFHR or HFLA rituals? How do they emerge and fade in the
                    history of different groups? Are there selective pressures that favour one mode
                    over the other, or both at once? Such questions have sometimes been prompted by
                    unexpected empirical discoveries. For example, careful analysis of more than 645
                    rituals from a sample of 74 contemporary cultures worldwide reveals that LFHA
                    rituals become less common as agricultural intensity increases . This finding prompted the hypothesis that fusion
                    is especially important in simple societies in which local groups compete for
                    scarce resources. By contrast, in large-scale societies producing storable
                    agricultural surpluses cultural evolution would favour more encompassing
                    identity markers associated with HFLA rituals. We have found much evidence to
                    support these predictions by examining changing patterns of ritual frequency and
                    emotional arousal in the transition from foraging to farming across a range of
                    sites in the Middle East 
                    . The creation of Seshat, however, allows us to
                    pose and answer many more questions about the role of ritual in the evolution of
                    social complexity. For example, do HFLA rituals appear before, during, or after
                    the rise of large-scale, centralized polities? Are armies with LFHA rituals more
                    successful than those that lack them? Do religions that combine HFLA and LFHA
                    rituals last longer than those with only HFLA rituals? Indefinitely many
                    questions of this kind will become answerable once a critical mass of data has
                    been uploaded into Seshat.
                The questions we are interested in here are only answerable statistically, by
                    quantifying patterns of variation across many polities and religions over long
                    periods of time. But that does not mean the data we use can be rough and ready.
                    Actually, we can only answer our questions adequately if the data are
                    sufficiently fine-grained and precise. The data captured on dysphoric rituals,
                    for example, is often tied to very small groups with complex and changing ties
                    to the overall polities. Capturing these relationships is crucial for our
                    analysis. It is of little use to us to know, for example, that a particular
                    polity has LFHA rituals unless we know exactly what groups were performing the
                    rituals, on what scale, with what degree of frequency, and so on. So our
                    strategy of quantifying history depends on the reliability and depth of
                    qualitative historiography at least as much as it depends on the statistical
                    power of the polities and periods sampled. 
                 Fully integrating a qualitative and a quantitative dimension into one data set
                    is a massive undertaking that requires a deep collaboration between researchers
                    with very different skill sets on an unprecedented scale. The Seshat project
                    provides for the first time a methodological framework and technical
                    infrastructure to tackle this task in earnest. Despite the progress made and the
                    impressive synergy already created between the historical and the social
                    sciences, further collaboration between large numbers of scholars is essential
                    for the database to fulfill its potential. Furthermore, there are additional
                    challenges facing a project of this scale. These challenges include finding more
                    methodological robust ways to deal with missing data, understanding better
                    issues of intercoder reliability, and devising more sophisticated ways to
                    capture levels of uncertainty of data and levels of disagreement between
                    experts. As these challenges touch upon core views and attitudes towards data
                    and interpretation in the humanities, tackling these challenges successfully
                    will depend on the level of involvement of humanists. This article has argued
                    strongly for the need to bring different skill sets together into a shared
                    infrastructure. The article is above all a call to the wider community of
                    historians and humanists to keep joining this effort, to make Seshat also their
                    home and to help provide a broad research community with a richer and publicly
                    available dataset to explore the past in novel ways. Data-driven longue
                        durée history requires many hands.
            

                Acknowledgements
                This work was supported by a John Templeton Foundation grant to the Evolution
                    Institute, entitled Axial-Age Religions and the Z-Curve of
                        Human Egalitarianism, a Tricoastal Foundation grant to the Evolution
                    Institute, entitled The Deep Roots of the Modern World: The
                        Cultural Evolution of Economic Growth and Political Stability, an
                    ESRC Large Grant to the University of Oxford, entitled Ritual, Community, and Conflict (REF RES-060-25-0085), and a grant
                    from the European Union Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant
                    agreement No 644055 [ALIGNED, www.aligned-project.eu]).  We gratefully acknowledge the
                    contributions of our team of research assistants, post-doctoral researchers,
                    consultants, and experts. Additionally, we have received invaluable assistance
                    from our collaborators. Please see the Seshat website for a comprehensive list of private donors, partners,
                    experts, and consultants and their respective areas of expertise.
                The corresponding author is Pieter François who wrote an initial draft of the
                    article and who was in charge of the overall integrity of the article. The
                    authors would also like to thank Dr. Alexander O’Conner (ADAPT Centre, School of
                    Computing, Dublin City University, Dublin, Ireland) for his input on the section
                    on Linked Open Data.
            
