Title:  Episodic Theater and the Digital Text: Editing the Traveling
                    Players’ 
Volume:  014
Issue:  1
Date:  20 March 2020
Abstract:  
                This essay discusses the process of editing a rather simple playtext, the English
                    traveling players' Fortunatus, with a quite
                    complex history of circulation and performance and a vast network of sources and
                    influences. Since the traveling theater was contingent (context-based) and
                    extemporaneous, the associated playtexts, collaborative adaptations and
                    translations of English works, present unique challenges for editors and
                    scholars. In fact, their printed form often misrepresents the kind of theater
                    practiced. I raise the question of how the textual remnants of this theater
                    shaped critical attitudes regarding the travelers, and I suggest that
                    capabilities of digital publication can illuminate the episodic and modular
                    characteristics of early modern performance.
            
Full Body Text: 
Introduction
                 In the late sixteenth and early seventeenth century, troupes of English players
                    began leaving London to perform their plays for foreign audiences. They took
                    plays from Shakespeare, Christopher Marlowe, Thomas Decker, and other
                    Elizabethan and Stuart playwrights and performed them across the Continent, as
                    far east as modern Poland, as far north as Sweden. While early performances were
                    in English, they were quickly translated and adapted in these foreign contexts,
                    made to fit the various social and religious milieus of performance
		      
		     . In the process, the plays were
                    cut down, reworked and adapted in various ways, even sometimes reworked as
                    puppet theater, and the play texts associated with these players, left in a
                            mutilated state, were objects of
                        critical derision for most of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries . 
                With recent critical interest in cultural exchange, however, scholars have begun
                    to recognize this theater as an unexampled success
		    in the history of cultural relations .
		    Precisely because the players became so adept at navigating
                    various regions, their theater as an institution can reveal practices of
                    performance and cultural translation, features of transnational early modern
                    cultures, and the earliest reception history of Shakespeare and his
                    contemporaries on the Continent. In response to this growing interest, the (few)
                    texts associated with this theater have begun to be newly edited and translated,
                    made available to a wider audience of students and scholars. I am currently
                    producing a digital edition of Fortunatus, one of
                    the plays in the 1620 collection Engelische Comedien und
                        Tragedien, for Digital Renaissance Editions. The wider
                    availability of these texts will not only be useful for students and scholars,
                    especially considering the critical turn to transnationalism, it might also help
                    corroborate a reevaluation of the theater. And yet, as I hope to show, precisely
                    because of the extemporaneous and adaptive performance style of these players,
                    the surviving texts often misrepresent the practice of the theater; indeed, the
                    static form of the printed playtext explains much of the critical derision
                    directed at this theater, some of the misunderstanding of the travelers’ art. 
                 In this essay, I argue that the digital medium might be more congenial to the
                    adaptive theater practiced by early modern players, and I suggest how we might
                    encode characteristics of the theater into a digital edition. More broadly, I
                    attempt to show that creating a digital edition of the travelers’ Fortunatus can help us better understand the success
                    of this theater against its critics by illuminating the episodic and modular
                    characteristics of their performance. 
            

                The Challenges of Editing the Early Modern Travelers

                Even more than most early modern dramatic texts, the playtexts associated with
                    the early modern traveling theater present difficulties for the editor. Not only
                    are they quite rare, but they are, arguably, even further from performance than
                    the texts associated with the London stage for two interrelated reasons: their
                    episodic and extemporaneous style. The travelers’ performance of any play could
                    differ significantly in different contexts. When the players performed a play in
                    a new location, they would not only rework lines or scenes, but add or cut
                    entire episodes. Scholars have shown, for example, that popular scenes from
                    different plays might be stitched into a new performance; or that a play’s
                    content could change significantly depending on a region's official religion
                        . Early performance sometimes staged only scenes
                    from plays, strung together for the audience's entertainment, and this suggests
                    that, at least early in their travels, these players viewed the plays not as
                    coherent literary works but rather storehouses of engaging episodes. With the
                    plays and pieces of plays staged dozens of times across the Continent, each,
                    perhaps, differently, it becomes difficult to establish a  Traveling
                        Players’ Fortunatus . 
                 We might, then, turn simply to the surviving text, since evidence of each
                    individual performance is likely unrecoverable, letting the edition stand as a
                    record of this cultural object rather than attempting to capture the players’
                    performance of Fortunatus more generally. Even
                    here, however, the printed text misrepresents the players. The players’ style
                    was not only episodic, but also extemporaneous, heavily reliant on clowning and
                    nonlinguistic elements of the theater. They were famed acrobats and musicians,
                    also frequently afoul of authorities because of the bawdiness of their
                    performance style. While, as we will see, the Fortunatus associated with these players attempts to capture this
                    extemporaneous style, the static form of the codex proves incapable of
                    accurately representing the players.
                As the remnants of this theater, we are left with a relatively small number of
                    texts, often related in complex and partial ways to multiple English and German
                    dramatic and prose works. These works insinuate the variable, but also, of
                    course, irrecoverable plays that were actually staged by these English players
                    on the Continent, but they are also calcified in print, producing final and
                    static versions. A storehouse of these texts was printed in 1620, Engelische Comedien und Tragedien, likely compiled by
                    Friedrich Menius . It contained German
                    translations and adaptations of a number of English plays, including Titus Andronicus, Fortunatus, biblical histories, and seven interludes featuring the
                    popular stage clown of this theater, Pickelhering. 
                 Because most of these texts are not originals but rather
                    adaptations, usually part of complex and multifaceted story traditions,
                    recapturing the relationships between the original play in London and the
                    travelers’ adaptation can be almost impossible. Fortunatus demonstrates this complexity well. We have records of
                    three performances of Fortunatus by the traveling
                    players, each associated with the troupe of John Green, one of the most prolific
                    early travelers. The first was performed at Kassel in the winter of 1606/7.
                    Shortly thereafter, the players staged the play in Graz in 1608 before Maria
                    Magdelina, documented in her letter to her brother, the Archduke Ferdinand. The
                    last performance, also by Green’s troupe – though Green had perhaps died shortly
                    before this performance – took place in Dresden in 1626 .
                Of course, most archival records of the travelers’ performances do not include a
                    list of plays, and Green’s troupe performed across Northern Europe, likely
                    staging Fortunatus dozens of times. Even the three
                    performances we know, moreover, place the Fortunatus myth in starkly different
                    religious and cultural contexts. Moritz’s court at Kassel was among the first
                    that welcomed the English players, and the duke was well-known in England in the
                    period as a champion of Reformed Protestantism and a diligent internationalist.
                    At Graz, on the other hand, the players worked in a counter-Reformation state
                    and performed before a Catholic princess. These venues raise interesting
                    questions about the text: for, as scholars have shown, troupes would regularly
                    adapt the religious messages depending on context . How might the Fortunatus text have
                    changed in the hands of Green before a Reformed Duke like Moritz and a staunch
                    Catholic like Archduchess Maria Magdelena? Jerzy Limon has suggested, based on
                    Green's choice of patrons, that Green may have been Catholic himself, and thus
                    even the translation involved in an English Catholic player (Green) adapting a
                    playtext written by a fairly radical internationalist Protestant (Thomas Dekker)
                    based on a medieval Catholic proto-novel suggests the religious complexity of
                    this cultural exchange – only amplified in the more overtly religious texts
                    common to this theater . Though we have no
                    access to these performances, we can safely speculate that a different play was
                    performed in each of these three locations. 
                Moreover, this play staged a legend that was popular across Europe. Before the
                    end of the seventeenth century, in fact, the Fortunatus story had been
                    translated into Dutch, Polish, Danish, Hungarian, Low German, English, French,
                    Swedish, Icelandic, Italian, and perhaps Czech. This kind of popular culture
                    served as ideal material for the traveling theater, but it also offers us a
                    fascinating site for examining cultural translation in the period. How, we might
                    ask, were plays adapted in different linguistic and cultural areas? And did the
                    circulation of the legend – and even the English players – reshape the central
                    story? 
                Even focusing simply on the most immediately relevant English and German editions
                    provokes a great deal of uncertainty. Scholars generally divide the prose
                    versions of Fortunatus into two families: The
                    earliest printed version of the legend appeared in Augsburg in 1509, from which
                    a number of printings followed; a second family derives from a Frankfurt
                    edition, simplified, Protestantized, and moralized, from 1549 onwards. This
                    second family group led to the translations throughout Europe, including the
                    English translation (possibly) by Thomas Combe . (More on this shortly.)
                Fortunatus appeared first on the English stage in 1595-6, recorded by Henslowe as
                        The First Part of Fortunatus . Dekker then
                    received payment in 1599 for The Whole History of
                        Fortunatus. And finally, a month later, a smaller additional payment
                    for the altrenge of the boocke of the wholl history of
                        fortewnatus and for the eande of fortewnatus
                        for the corte. This last version, performed at court before
                    Elizabeth, is Dekker’s printed version, The Pleasant Comedie of Old
                        Fortunatus
                    .
                Since the nineteenth century, the 1620 German Fortunatus has been considered a translation of Dekker’s play. For
                    Charles Herford, it is a barbarous piece, and
                        a meager epitome of its original, but its connection to Dekker’s work is
                    clear; Paul Harms agrees, though he demonstrates also that the author of the
                    German piece drew extensively on the language of the German prose work . June Schlueter has recently argued that this
                    version may in fact be derived from an intermediary between the Dekker’s two
                    Fortunati, and thus it serves as important evidence into the character of the
                    first text before Dekker reworked it for court .
                    The play shares a number of elements with Dekker’s play (such as the use of echo
                    in the opening scene, and the appearance of spirits to judge and admonish the
                    characters) while also employing stock characteristics of the German stage
                    (especially the stage clown, Pickelherring). 
                The relationship between the English prose translation and Dekker’s text has also
                    been a subject of critical debate. In the nineteenth century, German scholars
                    conclusively established that Dekker’s play relies on the Augsburg and Frankfurt
                    versions of the Fortunatus story, but scholars have disagreed over whether these
                    works were mediated through a translation. In his discussion of the many
                    Fortunati in English translation, David Blamires assumes the priority of the
                    prose, relying primarily on the fact that Fortunatus appears well-known in
                    England from about 1577 , while Michael
                    Haldane has more recently suggested that Dekker’s work influenced the prose
                    version . The earliest surviving English
                    prose work we have, 1640, claims that it was translated by T.G.; all extant
                    later editions emend this to T.C. According to the titlepage of the final
                    printing, this work went through fourteen editions with relatively minor
                    changes. Some have suggested that Dekker used a Dutch intermediary translation,
                    but no Dutch translation before the seventeenth century is known.
                My purpose here with both Dekker’s play and the prose work is not to take sides,
                    but rather suggest quickly the complexity of the Fortunati-field. And this
                    overview tracks simply a very few of the English and German editions, neglecting
                    the multiple editions in other languages throughout Europe – and far from all
                    English and German versions. (There is, for example, a manuscript of another
                    copy at Kassel, perhaps composed at the court of Moritz, that seems influenced
                    primarily by Hans Sach’s 1553 play.) We have a complex enough set of sources
                    that discussing linear relationships seems almost impossible: there’s a
                    circularity inherent in the 1620 text, relying both on Dekker and the German
                    prose work, which itself had been a source for Dekker (perhaps with an English
                    translation serving as intermediary). Instead of origin and adaptation, then,
                    the theater presents a convoluted picture of mutually influencing sources and
                    traditions, all tied together in a network, all sources available to the
                    travelers as they adapted their text. As each performance varies, the borders of
                    the work become more obscure; and if a digital edition can expand indefinitely
                    to include related material, where should the line be drawn? 
                Even if we could recover the history of adaptation, however, these texts would
                    not actually capture the kind of performance that made these players an
                    international success. They used this complex tradition in spontaneous and
                    contingent ways, catering their plays to their audiences. Drawing on popular scenes, players felt free
                    even to stitch scenes from various plays together if they had proven successful
                    in the past . Tiffany Stern has shown that
                    many early modern playwrights saw themselves as patchers, and, if
                    Gabriel Egan has qualified this for the London stage, it seems abundantly clear
                    that the travelers worked with plays as piecemeal products; they apparently
                    worried little about the integrity of the whole
                    . In the first
                    decade, while players performed in English to German-speaking audiences, short,
                    visual stories replete with shared iconography certainly helped mitigate the
                    language barrier; but this necessity, reimagining plays as storehouses of
                    performance episodes, shifting authority to the performer, who would respond to
                    what worked on these foreign stages, fits poorly in a printed codex. Indeed, as
                    Richard Preiss has demonstrated with clowning, to set in print the antics of
                    Pickelherring reimagines them not as extemporaneous wit, but as an authored
                    dialogue. 
                
                Much of the history of scholarship on this theater has been determined both by
                    the challenges that the episodic character of this theater poses to source
                    studies and the challenges that the extemporaneous style poses to aesthetic
                    judgement. In the early twentieth century, these plays received rather desultory
                    attention primarily for their connection to canonized playwrights. Almost
                    always, early scholarship on the traveling theater was tied specifically to
                    Shakespeare and fueled by the desire to trace these plays back to their
                    prestigious originals and show how fully the players had corrupted Shakespeare’s
                            art.. While, therefore, the archival scholarship was often excellent,
                    and these sources remain valuable resources for the study of the travelers, they
                    tend to privilege original English versions, denigrate the remaining playtexts
                    associated with the theater, and oversimplify the relationship among the various
                    plays because of a desire for simple and unidirectional connections. Indeed, it
                    is the adaptable and episodic character of the theater, frustrating these
                    attempts at tracking influence, that often elicited the most critical ire. For
                    Albert Cohn, one of the earliest and most influential scholars of the travelers,
                    this defined their failure:
                There is no inward connection among the parts; we see a
                            succession of moving incidents, adventures of all sorts, intended to
                            excite the interest of the spectators, to gratify their curiosity and
                            their love of spectacle, or to tickle their risible muscles, but all
                            these incidents are merely placed side by side without any internal
                            unity.
                Cohn concentrates specifically on the lack of wholeness or
                    coherence, framing his discussion of the Engelische
                        Comedien by focusing on their patched
                    character: he finds them in a cruelly mutilated state; their corruption and
                            mutilation are quite inexplicable, he adds, if they had worked directly from the
                    originals. Cohn’s image visualizes the original playtexts as complete texts – a
                    whole codex – and the German adaptations as partial, incomplete – leaves ripped
                    apart and regathered in an aesthetic abomination.
                In the translation of Fortunatus, this piecemeal
                    quality has similarly been disparaged. The story of Fortunatus, like the legend
                    of Faustus and other popular folk stories that the travelers took on the road,
                    was itself composite and episodic. One early scholar describes both the
                    prose-version and the adapted plays as an aggregate of very
                            heterogeneous elements and a series of episodes, loosely appended and
                            easily detached. For
                    early critics, this typified the play’s aesthetic failures; for the players, it
                    presented opportunities. The element drawing perhaps the strongest critique
                    appears multiple times in the play: Hier agiret
                        Pickelhering. Here Pickelhering performs. Those cryptic words end
                    the first two acts and appear three times in the third act, and they advertise
                    the extemporaneous and hybrid nature of this performance. According to Paul
                    Harms, they almost certainly could not have been performed and resulted instead
                    from a garbled memory of Dekker’s Shadow character. Once again reading
                    the text as a unified whole, Harms proclaims: Die englischen komödianten studierten die Wirkung, welche
                            ihr Spiel auf das Publikum ausübte, sicherlich genau, und sie werden
                            wohl kaum in dem Augenblick, wo die Spannung den höchsten Grad erreicht
                            hatte, durch ein unorganisches Zwischenspiel sich um den Effekt gebracht
                            haben. The English Comedians studied the works
                        which they performed to the public, surely enough, and they would hardly
                        have broken the effect in the instant where the suspense had reached the
                        highest level through an inorganic interlude.
                
                Despite Harms’ distaste for the extemporaneous elements, however, these brief
                    scenes fit perfectly with what we know about the theater. We hear continually of
                    the success of interludes, the popularity of the stage clown, and the use of
                    visual icons and music.  We might also add, as scholarship on clowning and
                        performance has shown, the interruptions were not as far from performance in
                        London as Harms imagined. While failing in the text, then, these
                    scenes apparently succeeded on stage, as Pickelhering remained one of the most
                    popular and recognizable characters of the English travelers throughout the
                    century. The problem, we might argue, comes from a breakdown in the remediation
                    as the work moves from stage to page, encouraging us to search for
                        wholeness.
                The original author or compiler sought to stress the reciprocity between print
                    and performance and, in his title, almost erases the translation that occurs in
                    this move to printing the plays (for the first time): der Gestalt in offenen Druck gegeben/ dass sie gar leicht
                            darauss spielweiss widerumb angerichtet... können. Given
                                    form in print that they might easily be reworked from there for
                                    performance. Menius apparently desired the collection to be used as
                    performance texts, and the works often reflect this connection to performance on
                    stage. The stage directions are far more robust than in contemporary English
                    editions, including even minor actions and emotions that they players expressed.
                    Some speeches, moreover, seem as if Meinus attempts to capture exactly the
                    performance he had witnessed. In one of the Pickelhering interludes, for
                    example, we have a long and flowing sentence from a troubled old man:
                Hum / hum / hum / alle meine Nachbarn / hum hum
                        / hum / die thun mir sagen / hum / hum / hum / wie meine Fraw Maria / hum /
                        hum / eine lose Hure seyn / hum / hum / hum / und bey den Schwager auch wol
                        schlaffen sol / wol schlaffen sol / hum / hum / welches denn traun ein
                        grosses were / ein grosses were / hum / hum / ich kan es nicht gläuben /
                        noch nicht gläuben / hum hum / nein noch nicht gläuben kan ich das / denn
                        die Fraw helt mich auch gar zu werth und lieb / ja grewlich lieb hat sie
                        mich / O ein tugendtsam Weib / in 9. Herren Landen wird ihres gleichen nicht
                        gefunden werden 
                 Hum, hum, hum, all my neighbors, hum, hum,
                        hum, they say to me, hum, hum, hum, how my wife Maria, hum, hum, is a loose
                        whore, hum, hum, hum, and will also sleep with her brother-in-law, hum, hum,
                        which then would be a big thing, in truth, a big thing, hum, hum, I can't
                        believe it, still can't believe, hum hum, No, I still cannot believe that,
                        for my wife holds me in such high regard and love, yes, an outrageous love
                        she has for me. O a virtuous wife, in nine kingdoms her like isn't to be
                        found!
                The sprawling, repetitive sentence presumably mimics the deliberative and anxious
                    action of the old man, uncertain about his soon-to-be bride. Not only the
                    diction – with the inclusion of guttural fussing (hum hum) – but
                    even the punctuation highlights this performative aspect, with pauses (/)
                    littered across the page, and even the odd double-colon (: / :).  Scholars
                        have long discussed issues with editing early modern punctuation. Claire M.
                        Bourne, for example, has read the pilcrows commonly used in early modern
                        printed play books as a typographical means by
                                which to render dramatic form and its effects legible in
                                print. Meinus, it
                    seems, means to capture the dynamism of the plays in performance, but also
                    struggled with the remediation, the impossibility of rendering performance
                    entirely with punctuation. 
                In printing the plays, they were locked into a static form that belied the
                    dynamic quality of the theater, and thus subject to a measure of
                        wholeness and unity that seems
                    entirely inappropriate to the kind of theater these players practiced. The
                    messiness of the previous speech, with its odd punctuation, offers only one
                    instance of this marked failure. More fully, we see the inability to capture the
                    extemporaneous elements in the placeholders, the etc’s. in
                    actors’ speeches and stage directions. As Laurie Maguire has shown,
                        etc’s were much more open and ambiguous in the early modern
                    theater, and could serve a range of purposes, from a bawdy pun to representing
                    interruption. In this play, however, almost always the etc.’s
                    offer the actors freedom in their performance . Etc. appears eleven times, four times in a spoken
                    line and seven times in stage directions, generally calling for either
                    repetition (as when a disguised Fortunatus calls out apples to sell:
                        Beautiful apples of Damascus, etc. Beauty of youth, buy apples of
                        Damascus, which will give you a beautiful countenance. Apples of Damascus,
                        etc.) or for an embellished action on the stage: Now
                            Andolosia comes. Sets Agrippina angrily on the ground. Goes around like
                            a bear. Throws a rock. Turns his eyes in his head. She shivers and
                            quakes, etc. Despite the very detailed account of
                    Andolosia’s action, the etc. at the end of the line appears to
                    grant both actors permission to extend this visual and emotion-wrought scene.
                    Almost dumb-show-like in its visual interpretability, this kind of action seems
                    particularly useful for this cross-cultural performance, especially before the
                    works were translated, as this theater performed across languages. 
                Finally, and perhaps most characteristic of this theater, we see the centrality
                    and spontaneity of performance in both the detail and the occasional ambiguity
                    in stage directions, especially, again, in the calls for Pickelhering to
                    perform: Hier agiret Pickelhering. Pickelhering might
                    act differently each time, playing on the audience, drawing extemporaneously on
                    the materials of this particular stage or the beliefs of this particular
                    community. As current research on this theater has stressed, Pickelhering was
                    essential to the travelers’ popularity;
                    and yet, his kind of performance is erased in print. With the obvious absence of
                    a performance archive, scholars encountered only the shadow of
                    Pickelhering that remained.
                The point, here, is that for this kind of transnational theater, based in
                    adaptation and extemporaneous performance, a print edition misrepresents the
                    players, and the inevitable flattening explains much of the critical dismissal
                    of this theater. Both the research foci (which texts are related) and, perhaps
                    more controversially, the aesthetic assumptions (in praise of
                        wholeness) of early scholarship on this theater was
                    inevitably tied to the material technology of the works studied – the printed
                    playtext. Our judgement of the theater is refracted through aesthetic appraisals
                    of the printed remnants. The traveling players, however, could easily cut and
                    replace, add and subtract, scenes and elements from their performances not
                    because their theater was derivative and inferior, but because it took part in a
                    tradition that did not privilege wholeness and sequential reading. To recreate
                    these aspects of the theater, we need a kind of text similarly adaptable and
                    episodic, that recovers the iconic elements and the visual elements of this
                    theater without locking it into place; to recover Menius’s intention of plays
                    that recreate these varied performances, we need to capture the piecemeal and
                    extemporaneous style of the players. 
                The digital text, I would argue, allows us to do just that: to undercut the very
                    notions of wholeness and plot linearity that have been insisted upon in the
                    criticism of this theater. For several decades now, editors have been exploring
                    the possibilities of e-space, challenging our continued reliance on the
                    metaphors and assumptions of print, and they have developed a theory of digital
                    publication that often aligns well with the practices of this theater in its
                    modularity We might think of the plays episodes as modular in use, since
                        they could be cut, added, and recombined during multiple performances.
                     and spontaneity. For works in this theater, the mutability and
                    multiplicity of the digital text, often stressed in scholarship, seems
                    particularly germane, both in our attempt to re-imagine the digital text and to
                    recover the aesthetics of the traveling theater. Over a decade ago, Jerome
                    McGann noted that
                A critical edition can clearly be built in digital form
                            that allows a dynamical tracking and analysis of that recent literary
                            discovery, the readerly text. This clearly also
                            means that the fundamentally dynamical character of the textual
                            condition can be digitally realized: the dialectic of the field
                            relations between the history of the text’s transmission and the history
                            of its reception [...] In such a case you will not want to build a model
                            of one made thing, you will try to design a system that can simulate all
                            the realized and realizable documentary possibilities – the
                            possibilities that are known and recorded as well as those that have yet
                            to be (re)constructed.
                Extending this insight beyond the document to include performances, we might add
                    that to recover the character of this early modern traveling theater, we should
                    design an edition that highlights the spontaneity and modularity of the players’
                    style. To indemnify the lost records of this theater requires going beyond the
                    traces that exist to look instead at how these dynamic plays might have been put
                    together on stage. 
            

                The travelers’ performance and the digital text

                 A digital edition of this Fortunatus, then, might
                    mitigate some of the challenges in understanding the success of the traveling
                    players. As digital publication has become more prevalent, a large scholarly
                    conversation has developed around experimenting with and theorizing the new
                    medium. The work of digitizing texts has been so important and productive, in
                    fact, that scholars continue to argue for its centrality to the digital
                    humanities more generally . While early
                    enthusiasm for the digital over the print form has cooled, we now have over
                    three decades of critical work that thinks through the difference between the
                    codex and e-space and hypothesizes the future of the book in the digital age.
                    The purported advantages of the digital, scholars have insisted, can be immense.
                    Most simply, digital publication allows for the almost endless inclusion of
                    material. For editors focused on drama, the multimedia capabilities of digital
                    publication, along with this extra space, have seemed especially promising, as
                    editions have experimented with including video of scenes or even entire
                    versions of their chosen play 
                    . Scholars have also focused
                    on how the digital environment shifts audience participation. For digital
                    scholarly editors, for example, Peter Shillingsberg’s sense of the text as work
                    site has reshaped the kinds of things we want our editions to do 
                    . Johanna Drucker’s catalogue of
                    features offered by e-space has also been influential for editors, particularly
                    her critique of mimicking the features of the codex and the call to instead take
                    advantage of the ability for digital texts to be manipulated at the level of
                    code; to be marked at each stage of manipulation; and to open collaborative
                    spaces of exchange . 
                Although debate continues over what exactly constitutes a  digital
                        scholarly edition, for many theorists and practitioners, taking
                    advantage of these new capabilities is essential in distinguishing between print
                    and digital media. 
                        
                        
                    . In Patrick Sahle’s definition, at least,
                    it is not the mere fact of digitization, but rather an underlying digital paradigm which capitalizes on the new
                    functionalities of computer publishing:  As long as
                            the contents and functionalities of a typographically born and
                            typographically envisioned edition do not really change with the
                            conversion to digital data, we should not call these derivate editions
                                digital. It is the conceptual framework that
                            makes the thing – not the method of storage of the information either on
                            paper or as bits and bytes” 
                        . This has been insisted
                    frequently: that we cannot simply replicate the printed book online 
                    
                        
                    
                    . And yet, even decades into digital
                    publishing, we still are discovering in practice and experimentation myriad ways
                    in which this digital paradigm might take shape. As in digital publication
                    generally, scholarly editors have explored how the use of hypertext, fluid
                    publication, and the multimedia capabilities of these platforms have reshaped
                    editing. Sahle, for example, has noted an overall shift from form to content 
                        , while others have seen the de-centering of
                    the editor and the democratization of editing . In terms of the text itself, rather than the editorial role, many
                    scholars have noted a move to a pluralistic notion of the text, what Elena
                    Pierazzo calls the dynamic, Heraclitean view of texts that results from digital publication. I
                    would like to argue further through this case study of Fortunatus that these features will also, inevitably, shape the
                    aesthetics of the early modern texts we move online; indeed, as we will see
                    shortly, the very modularity that the digital environment encourages might help
                    us recapture the style of the traveling theater. 
                 Aesthetics has, of course, also been a central concern for scholars of digital
                    media, though less often raised in discussions of scholarly editing, as
                    theorists have cataloged the changing aesthetics of the new form: how do we
                    experience the text differently – derive pleasure from the text differently –
                    because of these new characteristics? Much of the early response to digital
                    publication in the 1990s exuberantly theorized the radical change that hypertext
                    would bring about, as well as the ephemerality of the new medium. While these arguments have long been
                    qualified, still, the facility of movement in a digital environment certainly
                    changes the experience of reading. Commentators have long noted the continued
                    de-centering of the author and intellectual property , as well as the increasingly interactive
                    and adaptive nature of the text online . Similarly, the modularized structure of the hypertext, reflecting
                    the web more generally, privileges a kind of episodic, context-laden writing and
                    allows us to derive enjoyment from the text in new ways. As we have seen, the
                    modular and collaborative ethos encouraged by the digital form strikingly
                    reflects several neglected features of the early modern traveling theater. 
                As has often happened both in textual studies and humanities computing, the early
                    modern theater, because of its eccentricities, fragmentary nature, and
                    unpredictability, serves as an intriguing test site for practicing theory.
                    Despite noting the tension between the past-facing textual scholarship and
                    forward-facing interface design, Alan Galey encourages textual editors to
                    continue their digital experimentation: Why speculate when we can
                            prototype? – that is, to regard the future of the book as something we
                            create, not just observe and comment upon . A move away from the text, as we
                    will see, might in fact be truer to the theater than a careful and exact
                    rendering of the printed work online. Like many of these scholars, I am
                    interested here in the aesthetics of form, but primarily as a way of solving the
                    problems posed by editing the travelers’ Fortunatus. I will attempt to show that the nonlinearity and even
                    randomness made possible in the digital platform not only recaptures an element
                    of these early modern players’ performance erased by the codex, it also hints at
                    the ways in which working from printed playtexts has shaped reaction to these
                    early modern players and, indeed, distorted our focus on the traveling theater. 

            

                Coding the Theatergram
                 My question in this edition, then, is how might new technologies challenge the
                    century-long interest in wholeness and instead help us
                    address the impasses scholars have encountered when attempting to study this
                    theater. The first problem, the problem of the episode, seems to me an issue
                    that can profitably be addressed with richer metadata in editions of the
                    traveling theater’s playtexts. As we have seen, source studies alone tend to
                    oversimplify the complex matrix of influence and borrowing. In fact, focusing on
                    the episodic character of the players' text might help us re-conceive both the
                    staging of early modern plays and the interrelations between national theaters.
                    The episodic structure can be easily captured by the modularity inherent in the
                    digital text – a simpler version, in fact, of the numerous TEI projects that
                    code everything down to the smallest unit (as suggested by Peter Robinson in his
                    work with Chaucer) .
                First, this markup would facilitate our attempt to track adaptation as the legend
                    moves across the Continent, supplementing traditional approaches, and better
                    fitting this messy history. As any critical edition requires, the digital Fortunatus will include a history of sources and
                    adaptations, along with other closely-related versions of the play. Scholars
                    involved in some of the most successful publication of early modern drama online
                    have often stressed this expansiveness characteristic of the online edition, and
                    it has allowed a number of innovative textual apparati . And yet, from what we know of the character
                    of this remarkably adaptive theater, this contextual material becomes
                    practically endless. While the borders of Shakespeare online tend to be
                    demarcated with some solidity – though perhaps unfairly – this lesser known and
                    more collaborative theatrical production lacks both the cultural capital and the
                    (somewhat) clear transmission history; thus an online version of the players'
                        Fortunatus, as we have seen, presents new
                    challenges for a digital text that operates primarily by supplement. 
                 More recent scholarship has turned from critique of the traveler's texts to
                    examining the complex interconnections among sources in the early modern
                    theater, and has shown, in the words of Robert Henke and Eric Nicholson, that
                            the transnational dissemination of European
                            theater resembled an amorphous net or web much more than a
                            line. This
                    critical shift to modular thinking – invoking networks to explain social
                    phenomenon – is certainly related to technological development, and we should
                    perhaps be wary of our theory falling into yet another pattern (everything is a
                    network); but undoubtedly digital publication also facilitates this approach.
                    Moreover, this editorial stance reshapes our critical approach to the text.
                    Re-conceiving the early modern theater text in this way, we are encouraged to
                    search not for source and adaptation, but rather nodes and points of connection.
                    And in the case of this theater, as I have suggested, our nodes should be not
                    the whole play, but rather its building blocks: the
                    episodes within. 
                Drawing on George Louise Clubb’s work on the theatergram, a
                    detachable and translatable story block used in drama, might help us
                    conceptualize this network of connections .
                    By establishing the key story blocks and examining how they change in various
                    editions – whether printed or recorded in the diaries of audience members -- we
                    might more accurately speculate on the relationship between plays, troupes, and
                    even theaters. A larger attention to these overlapping theatergrams
                    in digital editions could thus prove useful for re-conceptualizing the works
                    themselves, as well as for understanding the history of adaptation and
                    transmission. In this edition, therefore, I have experimented with including
                    metadata on each theatergram contained in the text, treating each
                    as a detachable unit. To accomplish this fully, we need a common language of
                        theatergrams. Early modern dramatic works are already divided
                    into acts and scenes, obviously, but coding for the theatergram
                    encourages us instead to look for portable storyblocks that can function on
                    their own – or be drawn into another work. Sometimes, however, these scenes
                    might cross traditional hierarchical divisions (of scenes and acts) and
                    therefore challenge TEI’s base in XML. TEI provides resources for embedding
                    non-hierarchical structures, and perhaps the simplest and most applicable for
                    the task of coding theatergrams is the floatingText element, which
                    allows us to encode front and back matter for each individual
                        theatergram. In fact, floatingText is often used for encoding
                    plays-within-plays and dumb shows, and the theatergram is certainly
                    comparable in structure to a play-within.
                The floatingText element allows us to associate a range of metadata with each of
                    these smaller units, including characters, setting, and properties. Stage
                    materials, for example, are important for the material history of the travelers,
                    as we will see shortly. I have included them with a list in the set element, but
                    remain open to any more elegant or efficient means. Less materially, we might
                    also include information about the tropes and icons referenced in each
                        theatergram. Because this theater was so visual, steeped in
                    transnational icons, the metadata might profitably build on kinds of search
                    techniques developed for images.
                As an example of theatergram, early in the German Fortunatus (as in
                    Dekker’s play), when first confronted with the option of wealth or wisdom from
                    Fortune, three spirits appear to share their fate and the lessons they learned
                    of the futility of riches. This scene is incidental to the main plot, the three
                    spirits never again appearing, but it does offer a generalizable lesson that,
                    with the appropriate costuming, could be repeated again and again on stage.
                    Moreover, though short, its inclusion in the play’s full title signals a kind of
                    importance attached by the players to the episode. It might be coded with the
                    floatingText element like this:
                
<sp>
    <speaker>FORTUNATUS.</speaker>
    <p>Oh, if I only might have a year to consider! First, wisdom, yes, wisdom.
       You are the most noble virtue, but how will wisdom be regarded in these
       times: namely, as foolishness.</p>
    <p>Next, riches. In the whole world, you're esteemed most highly, for so it
       goes in our time, that if a person is graced with all the virtues and
       has no money, it's all for nothing.</p>
    <p>Third, strength. One hears in these times of the most powerful, how they
       came to the most wretched ends because they relied entirely on their
       strength.</p>
    <p>Fourth, health. Yes, this is to be wished for nearest God on Earth. But
       still, if one doesn't have any money with it, they must plague their
       healthy body with hunger and thirst.</p>
    <p>Fifth, beauty. Yes, in most of the tragedies one can find how wretchedly
       and miserably the most beautiful people had to end their lives.</p>
    <p>Sixth, long life. Yes, that would also be very good, but if I should
       suffer poverty along with it, I'd only wish that life might be shortened
       for me. But who are these who step in here so dejectedly?</p>
</sp>
<floatingText type="theatergram">
    <front>
       <castList>
          <castItem> The first spirit.</castItem>
          <castItem> The second spirit.</castItem>
          <castItem> The third spirit.</castItem>
       </castList>
       <set>
          <list>
          <item> Costuming for a Spanish king</item>
          <item> Costuming for a Holy Roman Emperor</item>
          </list>
       </set>
    </front>
    <body>
       <stage>Three spirits now come bound in chains and speak.</stage>

       <sp>
           <speaker>The first spirit.</speaker>
           <p>Alas, we poor, damned souls, who can never more find any peace,
              we must float around until the end of the world. O Fortunatus,
              we see that Fortune would impart her gifts to you, but look to
              yourself, and do not take them, for with them you shall come
              into corruption. She also imparted her gifts to me and made me
              king of Spain, but cursed be the hour that I partook of them,
              and you, Fortune, I curse you fully!</p>
       </sp>

       <sp>
           <speaker>The second spirit.</speaker>
           <p>I advise you poor people, do not accept her gifts. She also
              became favorable to me and made me a most powerful emperor, yes,
              and through that I lost both body and life, yes, even my poor
              soul. And therefore, O Fortune, I curse you fully!</p>
       </sp>

       <sp>
           <speaker>The third spirit.</speaker>
           <p>O Fortune, how sadly have you deceived me! If you had left me
              alone and not raised me to such honor, I would be in eternal
              rest. Now, however, I must float here and there and can find no
              place to stay. O Fortunatus, take nothing from her, otherwise
              she'll deceive you even as she did me. No we must leave from
              here. O be fully cursed, you granter of misfortune!</p>
       </sp>

       <sp>
           <speaker>Fortuna</speaker>
           <p>Fly away, fly away, you great fools. It's of no use to you any
              longer, and that you lost your lives and souls is not my fault,
              but rather your own, for I gave you the gifts well, but you
              gladly misused them. But you, Fortunatus, hurry up and say which
              of my six gifts you choose, for in a short while the hour of
              your fortune is passed.</p>
       </sp>

       <sp>
           <speaker>FORTUNATUS.</speaker>
           <p>Bountiful Goddess, I choose riches, so that I always have plenty
              of gold and money.</p>
       </sp>
    </body>
</floatingText>
                

                While this is far shorter than most theatergrams, it conveys a sense
                    of how we might define the characters, properties, and even images that
                    constitute this packagable story block. The episode captures the adaptation of
                    the theater, since it helps connect it to Dekker’s work (which included a
                    similar scene) and distance it from the original prose editions (which did not).
                    And, if three kings in royal regalia show up elsewhere to lament the cruelty of
                    Fortune, we might speculate that these scenes are in some way connected. Data
                    about visual icons and properties can help reimagine connections between plays,
                    since these travelers, limited by what they could physically carry, must often
                    have reused their materials of performance. Examples of overlapping properties
                    are manifold for the traveling theater; we might wonder, for example, whether
                    the horns given to Agrippina and the earls in Fortunatus were the same property used in the scene from Faustus (in the B text) in which Faustus gives a
                    skeptical knight horns. Tracking the use of this object might link the two plays
                    and provide insight into when the scene was added to Faustus. 
                Additional metadata at the level of the theatergram, moreover, would facilitate a
                    better understanding of how context and resources shaped the episodic character
                    of this theater. In the early twenty-first century, scholars revitalized the
                    study of stage properties, as cultural materialists demonstrated the
                    embeddedness of these products in economic, social, and religious systems of
                    meaning . Indeed, in this scholarship, the circulation of props outside the
                        theater becomes as important as their role on the stage. The travelers
                        carried props and costuming across various regions of Northern Europe, and
                        these materials themselves often marked the theater’s success and sanction.
                        We have significant archival records – perhaps even better than our
                        performance records – of the gifts of stage properties and costuming given
                        by dukes to the travelers. Because these materials of performance were
                        expensive, court books often recorded in detail what was purchased for the
                        players. In 1612, for example, we know the Brandenburg players were given 70
                        ells of red silk; 50 ells of red cord; monks' dresses; eighteen large and
                        seventeen long plumes; a sword with a gold hilt; a wooden shield; four death
                        heads; a painted cloud; and various carvings . Most of these materials were associated with the Turkish Triumph Comedy, but inevitably, such
                    expensive gifts would be reused and reshape later performance of other plays.
                    Connecting plays to the materials necessary to stage them, therefore, once again
                    helps us understand the relationship between the economic history and
                    performance history of these players.
                 As with all editing, deciding what constitutes a theatergram and
                    what material to include is an interpretive act. But it is based in the
                    materials and conditions of the travelers’ performance, and it might help us
                    begin visualizing the nodes and connections in this great web of early modern
                    theater. 
            
An aesthetics of randomness and the episodic
                 The problem of performance style is more complex and opens long-running debates
                    over editing early modern drama for performance. While the online Fortunatus is
                    not intended as a performance edition (but aimed at readers: students and
                    scholars), increased attention to issues of performance in editing certainly
                    facilitates a recovery of the strengths of the travelers and should shape any
                    new edition of their plays . Scholars have also begun exploring the
                    intersections between digital texts and performance . My chief interest, however, is in
                    capitalizing on the digital text to make the history and aesthetics of the
                    traveling theater more apparent. The traveling theater, I would argue,
                    represents a special case in which not only do we have few existing playtexts,
                    long considered derivative of other plays, and almost no record of performance
                    history, but the playtexts themselves point to the importance of spontaneous,
                    contingent (context-based) performance. We might also add that the tension
                    between authority and collaborative performance does not exist for the traveling
                    theater’s texts; they are attached to no author, but rather evidence of how the
                    English plays were adapted during performance in European contexts. 
                 Coding the theatergram already shifts our focus from the whole to the episode,
                    inevitably influencing our critical insights. Beyond this, however, new
                    capabilities of the digital medium might usefully illuminate the traveling
                    theater’s performance, in part because the modular style (plays built from
                    small, interchangeable storyblocks) and spontaneity (plays changed based on
                    context in impromptu performance) are especially congenial to the digital text.
                    We might, for example, note simply the expansion of space and the multimodality
                    common to the digital edition. Perhaps videos of Pickelhering characters, or at
                    least the clowning tradition that stems from these characters, are available on
                    Youtube. Certainly, experimentation with multimodality in performance editions
                    has proven successful . As the editors of the experimental
                    and influential Richard Brome Online have argued,
                            where there is no substantial stage history of
                            a playwright’s canon, then editing to illuminate the
                                theatrical strengths of the texts becomes more
                            urgent, and videos
                    of actors performing these roles, like the Brome
                        Online edition provides, could help readers understand the success
                    of these plays. Yet such videos, while very useful for imagining the
                    multiplicity of performance, would be only a static way of filling in the
                    placeholder provided by the stage direction, and once again would not
                    necessarily replicate the adaptation and dynamism of the actual performances. I
                    have therefore also experimented with a simple Javascript program, which
                    randomly presents one of the Pickelhering interludes included in the collection
                    in the space of the stage direction calling for Pickelhering to act. Seven of
                    these interludes were contained within the collection, ranging from short plays
                    to long songs, and each capitalizes on the non-linguistic strengths of this
                    theater: slap-stick comedy, music, acrobatics. This, certainly, would still
                    never perfectly replicate the player’s performance, which remains its own
                    distinct form; players often navigated their contexts and appealed directly to
                    their audiences in sophisticated ways, habits of performance that a randomly
                    generated text would belie. This form does, however, ensure that different
                    readers would experience a slightly different play; the overlapping themes
                    between Fortunatus and the recorded Pickelhering
                    plays, from gender competition to class resentment, might highlight different
                    elements of the central, Fortunatus plot. More simply, and yet I think more
                    importantly, the text changes with each reading, and the possibilities in the
                    digital space for animation allow us to recreate at least the experience of
                    reading a work with changing parts. In this, perhaps, even the aesthetic value
                    of wholeness might be challenged.
                Editors with DRE will be responsible for the final coding; the following is
                    simply an example of the kind of randomness that can be integrated into an
                    edition of this kind. The English excerpts are from my translation of the German
                    play.
                The program is quite simple, modeled after the number of random generators
                    operating online. It uses a Request command to pull the text from a file in a
                    folder of Pickelhering Plays, and Math.random() to ensure that each time the
                    play loads a new, random Pickelhering interlude is selected. Currently, readers
                    must click on the stage direction to display the text of the interlude, though
                    it would, of course, be simple to immediately include the text.

                
<head>
   <script type="text/javascript"> filenames = [ 'IX.txt', 'X.txt',
       'XI.txt', 'XII.txt', 'XIII.txt', 'XIV.txt' ]; var filename =
       filenames[Math.floor(Math.random()*filenames.length)]; var
       http_request = new XMLHttpRequest(); function makeRequest() {
       http_request.onreadystatechange = handleCheckboxRequest;
       http_request.open('GET',filename,true); http_request.send(null); }
       function handleCheckboxRequest() { if (http_request.readyState == 4
       && http_request.status == 200) {
       document.getElementById('PickelheringPlay').innerHTML =
       http_request.responseText; } } </script>
   <title> Pickelhering Plays </title>
</head>
                        <body>
                            <h1>Pickelhering Spiel Randomizer </h1>
                            <sp>
                                <speaker>Andolosia.</speaker>
                                <p>Now might I be merry, for I have already swayed my pious and
                                    simple brother to let me have the sack of riches. Everyone knows
                                    to speak of the extreme beauty of Princess Agrippina of England,
                                    so that no one in the entire world surpasses her in beauty. Now
                                    it's my earnest desire to see young women, and to serve them.
                                    Therefore, I'll immediately direct myself to London. O, might I
                                    have been born of royal blood, I'd serve the king so truly that
                                    he would have to give her to me; but I am far too common. Thus,
                                    I'll hold a tournament every day on her behalf, so that if luck
                                    will be favorable to me, I might come into her grace. </p>
                            </sp>
                            <div class="top">
                                <a href="javascript://" onclick="makeRequest()"
                                    style="font-style:italic"> Here Pickelhering performs. </a>
                                <div id="PickelheringPlay"/>
                            </div>
                            <sp>
                                <speaker>Andolosia.</speaker>
                                <p>Now I am in London, where I have neglected nothing for the love
                                    of my princes, with presents, gifts, and tournaments, in which I
                                    have maintained myself so that no one has yet conquered me. But
                                    great ache and pain is in my heart, for yesterday evening the
                                    king invited me as a guest to his table. Near him sat his
                                    exuberantly beautiful daughter, Agrippina, over whom I am now
                                    even more fervent than before, and more fervently in love, so
                                    that I almost couldn't eat or drink anymore. O woe to me that I
                                    came here, for here I received a fire in my heart that cannot be
                                    put out, for Agrippina, you consider me too lowly, because I was
                                    born in a poor, not a royal, family. O, there is nothing more
                                    difficult on earth than to love without enjoying. I, too, can
                                    now complain, that I am just a little slave of love. Yet what
                                    doesn't love do? I will hold myself like a great duke or count
                                    because I can, and will invite the king, queen, and Agrippina to
                                    a banquet again, which shall then be held royally.</p>
                            </sp>

                            <stage>Goes in.</stage>
                        </body>
                
                
                As this short example shows, this randomness both employs and also frustrates
                    some of our central methods for reading plays, for making sense of plot and
                    subplot. Trained to value wholeness, we inevitably attempt to integrate and
                    synthesize, to show how the juxtaposition of the interlude might comment on the
                    main plot. At the same time, the randomness that is a feature of this text
                    insists that, however true those congruities might be, they are coincidental
                    rather than intentional; the subplot has no necessary role, and will, in fact,
                    likely be changed if you refresh your browser. We might even imagine a
                    productive course discussion in which students have read different interludes.
                    At the very least, this kind of program offers a textual representation of the
                    fact that, when dealing with plays, the same work doesn’t always contain even
                    the same linguistic code (to borrow McGann’s language).
            
Conclusion
                If, as I have tried to show, the form of the codex has shaped our response to the
                    early modern traveling theater, the question becomes how will new forms of
                    digital publication reshape this response: how will the aesthetics of the
                    digital reveal – and perhaps also distort – the travelers’ plays that have come
                    down to us from early modernity? While my use of TEI offers nothing new, the
                    focus on theatergrams shifts our critical focus and forces us to
                    interact with the text in a new way; we might, I suggest, discover quite a bit
                    that was missed when constrained too tightly by our desire for
                        wholeness.
                Early criticism of this theater was very much a book-based criticism.
                    Understandably, as these were the only remnants they had from which to work, the
                    nineteenth century pioneers tied research and response to the travelers to text
                    rather than performance, influencing the kind of aesthetic judgements they made.
                    My claim throughout, however, has been that as we migrate these texts into a new
                    medium, we have the opportunity to recover characteristics of the original
                    performance – spontaneity, randomness, episode – not only to help us better
                    understand and experience the theater’s success, but also to solve some of the
                    critical problems posed by the traveling theater.
                Of course, this is a long way from conservative textual scholarship, and one
                    might argue that, in creating this episodic text, not only am I failing to
                    capture the actual character of performance, but I am equally failing to capture
                    the codex in which these works first appeared; that instead, I have
                    Frankensteined into existence a new work. And this is certainly true: we have no
                    way of knowing if these included interludes were the ones performed with Fortunatus, nor how various theatergrams
                    changed in performance. The digital environment provides options for the
                    reader/user, however, and I hope this criticism is blunted by the fact that a
                    reader might simply read through a careful diplomatic transcription of the 1620
                    text, ignoring the interludes. In the randomness of the episode, I am interested
                    more in the form than content – and in what the experience of reading might tell
                    us about the interaction of form and content. I am interested in trying to
                    understand what made this episodic, spontaneous performance so successful, to
                    get away from the texts mutilated into the codex. One might even
                    make the argument, as many have, that the move from print to digital is one from
                    wholeness – a finished, closed product most often read linearly – to modularity
                    – an open process, connected with hyperlinks, blurring lines between text and
                    context. But perhaps in this move, we more closely approach the ethos and
                    aesthetics of the early modern travelers.
            
