Title:  Reading Note G: Ada Lovelace and the Clerical Labor
               of Codework
Volume:  020
Issue:  1
Date:  02 March 2026
Abstract:  
            
            This article examines human-machine co-authorship as it represented by Ada Lovelace
               in her famous translation of and appendices to L. F. Menabrea’s Sketch of The Analytical Engine Invented by Charles Babbage. Lovelace's
               translation notes and correspondence with Charles Babbage are read alongside the
               Engine itself, as a platform, and the histories of calculating engines, software
               development, and nineteenth-century clerical labor. Inspired by critical code
               studies, the article performs a close reading of what is today referred to as the
                  first computer program, a sequence of steps that Lovelace
               adds to her translation’s final Note G as an example of
               something the Engine can do. Ultimately, the article argues that the gendered power
               structures of collaborative work in Lovelace’s time — and the challenges women
               authors faced in the nineteenth century more broadly — influenced understandings of
               machine programming, and that Lovelace’s representation of the human-machine
               relationship in the first programmable calculating machine complicates the
               organizational structures of both clerical labor and software design.
         
Full Body Text: 

            Introduction
            Histories of computing, if they recognize Ada Lovelace as a software pioneer, include
               some version of the following origin story: On June 17, 1833, a young Lovelace
               visited Charles Babbage’s home for the first time and beheld the working model of his
               Difference Engine, the first ever fully automatic calculator. That tower of cogs —
               one seventh of the never-finished Engine — charmed the teenage Lovelace and tied her
               professional future to its inventor; the following year, Babbage conceived of the
               Analytical Engine, a calculating machine of greater capability and the subject of
               Lovelace’s one publication and claim to historical significance. I bring up this
               story because most of those same histories neglect to mention the other mechanical
               curiosity that Babbage showed off to his visitors that day. The mathematician also
               had in his possession many automata, including one which he kept in a similar glass
               case as the working model of his first Engine: John Merlin’s The
                  Silver Lady, which Babbage himself describes as a danseuse [who] attitudinized in a most fascinating manner. Her eyes full of
                  imagination, and irresistible
               . Here was a machinic woman, a windup
               ornament judged for its grace and appearance, burnished with the same status as the
               first automated thinking machine (Lady Byron qtd. by
                  ). In this other telling, computing history
               begins flanked by two symbolic female figures: One is a pre-programmed object of
               desire, and the other has come to be known as the first computer
                  programmer. Lovelace’s modern reputation can be traced back to
                  Alan Turing’s 1950 article, Computing Machinery and
                     Intelligence. Soon after, her reputation was solidified by B.V. Bowden
                  in Faster Than Thought (1953) and later D. L. Moore,
                  who claimed that Lovelace was the first computer
                     programmer. Subsequently, the Department of Defense first began
                  developing the Ada programming language in her memory (1977). 
            
            Mar Hicks reminds readers of a truism in Programmed
                  Inequality, that all history of computing is gendered
                  history
               . This article extends this truism to
               computing’s prologue by examining the gendered power structures in place during the
               earliest formulations of general-purpose programming. Computing history maps onto a
               cultural history in which women were once considered best suited to perform
               repetitious, clerical tasks — and desired as assistants by men who would rather not
               perform those tasks. Sadie Plant, who invokes the juxtaposition of Lovelace and
                  The Silver Lady in Zeros +
                  Ones, offers a revisionist history which both centers Lovelace’s role in
               software development and argues that software is feminine by design. Plant, citing
               the career of Grace Hopper (the Ada Lovelace of the Harvard Mark
                  1), highlights theoretical resonances between female sexuality and the
               ability of software to fulfill command requests by general-purpose imitation . More recently, Wendy Hui Kyong Chun in Programmed Visions cites Alan Turing and the Women’s Royal
               Navy Service (a.k.a. Wrens) to demonstrate programming’s clerical and arguably feminine underpinnings — both in terms of
                  personnel and of command structure
               . Chun, building on Plant’s argument, points
               out that the Bletchley Park Wrens, responsible for the tedious operation of
               cryptanalysis machines, were called slaves and servants by Turing, establishing a command structure which
               would become reflected in the design of computer science thereafter. Until very
               recently, computer programming was considered a service
                  occupation
               . Here is a third symbolic figure at the
               heart of computing history: the clerk who, through her servile labor, becomes both
               the performing object and the programmer.
             This article recontextualizes, through the figure of the clerk, Lovelace’s published
               work — which occurred under the conditions of clerical service and writing as
               translation, while nevertheless challenging authority through her own original
               contributions and authorship. I examine her translation, Sketch
                  of the Analytical Engine Invented by Charles Babbage, and one appendix in
               particular, Note G, which includes an algorithm designed
               to be executed by the Engine that has come to be known as the
                  first computer program
               . The mathematician Luigi Federico Menabrea published
                  Notions sur la machine analytique in
               the October 1842 issue of the French-language Bibliotheque Universelle de Geneve. The Notions provided a cursory but enthusiastic summary of the concepts upon
               which Babbage was basing his newest invention. A year later, to drum up financial
               support for the machine in England, Lovelace wrote an English translation for Taylor’s Scientific Memoirs. This translation was notable
               for her long appendices, which more than doubled the length of Menabrea’s original
                  text. The Sketch, published on August 24, 1843,
                  was considered a success by its small audience. Babbage would later write to
                  Lovelace’s son, Byron Noel, that his mother had written the
                     only comprehensive view of the powers of the Analytical Engine which the
                     mathematicians of the world have yet expressed (1857). However, the
                  article was not widely read and not republished until 1889. This paper uses the
                  version online at: www.fourmilab.ch/babbage/sketch.html
                In the famous Notes, Lovelace describes the
               Engine beyond concept, as if Babbage’s ideas amounted to a real machine, and she
               emphasizes its use of a punch card system to accept a program as input. The algorithm
               in Note G, which Lovelace calls a diagram of development, is a table that reflects the sequence of
               operations that the machine would perform to calculate the eighth Bernoulli number.
               Taking the claim that Lovelace wrote the first computer
                  program at face value, I read this diagram as if it
               were such a program, despite the anachronism, to demonstrate how Note G both serves a technical function and reveals the shifting social
               systems within which it operates, imagining the kinds of relationships that
               programmers will have with future programmable machines. I argue that Note G reflects and contributes to the labor dynamics of the
               era in which she was writing. I reconsider in my reading of Lovelace’s
                  program the historical command structures — master and
               servant, human and machine, subject and object — embedded in the ideas behind
               computing at its earliest stage in development.
            Specifically, I situate Lovelace’s article beside three clerical figures that predate
               Turing’s Wrens: (1) the literary amanuensis, an assistant who copies for or takes
               dictation from poets and authors in order to free their minds to think; (2) the
               mathematician’s clerk, a human computer who calculates longhand the drudgery of
               astronomical equations; and (3) the secretary, a figure that becomes important after
               Lovelace’s death, with the rise of shorthand notation and the typewriter. These
               intermediaries between the active human mind and its passive (or mindless) execution
               undergo a transformation during the nineteenth century. As Jay Bolter and Richard
               Grusin argue, the cultural work of defining a new medium may go
                  on […] before the invention of the device itself
               ; the above clerical practices, labor
               histories which define the movement of women into public service positions and the
               rise of telecommunications, provide a sort of prologue for innovations in which
               language or thought become automated. This article reads Lovelace’s description of
               the Analytical Engine against contemporary notions regarding these clerks as
                  perfect mediations. More to the point, I consider how the
               secretarial figure, as a metaphorical fulcrum between inspired
                  minds and automatic hands, embodies Victorian-era motivations to eradicate
               error in recording and calculation which in turn influence technological innovation
                  . The concept of service is built into the
               digital; it is a design that remains deeply gendered and
               shapes representations of labor in computing today . The above labor divisions — writer and steno, orator and recorder,
               philosopher and clerk — are the background against which Lovelace writes the
               future.
            There are two Lovelaces. We are most familiar with the brilliant daughter of the
               poetic genius, a founding mother of computer science, and an enduring symbol for
               women in S.T.E.M. That version often obscures the reality. As Sydney Padua writes,
               Lovelace’s iconic status (and relation to her father, Lord Byron) has made it
               impossible to hack through the thicket of the many
               contradictory accounts . Indeed, scholars
               have muddied this history further by waging a politically charged discourse war over
               the legitimacy of her contributions. The debate around Lovelace has a long
                  critical history. D. Stein, in Ada: A Life and a
                     Legacy (1985), wrote off Lovelace as a figure
                     whose achievement turns out not to deserve the recognition accorded it
                  . A. Bromley has refuted Lovelace’s reputation as the
                  first programmer 
                  . M. Campbell-Kelly echoed Stein when he wrote that
                     the extent of Lovelace’s intellectual contribution to the
                     Sketch has been much exaggerated (1996), and many other works on
                  Lovelace have overly focused on her biography and temperament. However, a counter
                  narrative simultaneously emerged. J. Baum’s The Calculating
                     Passion of Ada Byron (1986) treats her writing seriously, and B. A.
                  Toole’s Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers (1992) has
                  inspired many works, some cited in this paper, to treat Lovelace as an important
                  innovator in computer history. This article follows Roger Whitson’s claim that
                  Lovelace’s contribution becomes salient when we make room for critical
                     making in intellectual genealogies .  This paper will instead privilege her actual writing
               over her symbolic role in computer history narratives, focusing on how Lovelace’s
               contributions, like many contributions by women, take on a different (but no less
               influential) shape than those by great men of history
               . Lovelace, like many women authors before
               her, used strategies of anonymity, translation, and metaphors of mediation to claim
               authorship within male-dominated arenas. She may not have been the one to calculate
               the Bernoulli numbers for her Notes, but she did invent
               the machinic form Babbage’s calculations would take — authoring the Engine’s
                  design. The Notes were a collaborative effort:
                  Babbage and Lovelace discussed together the various
                     illustrations that might be introduced. He remembers in his
                  autobiography that I suggested several, but the selection was
                     entirely her own. So, also, was the algebraic working out of the different
                     problems, except, indeed, that relating to the numbers of Bernoulli, which I
                     had offered to do to save Lady Lovelace the trouble
                  . But even if Babbage had provided her with the
                  original equations, it was Lovelace who translated the algebra into a step-by-step
                  algorithm of her own design — an achievement which, as Thomas J. Misa outlines
                  extensively, is reasonably clear and clearly indicated in her letters . Her Notes are small experiments that invited new critical understandings
               of computing’s future through its material application . She challenged a nineteenth-century gender dynamic in which
               clerical figures become either mindless technologies of transcription (onto which a
               male stylus might transcribe his genius) or a threat to masculine authorship (by
               thinking for themselves). I argue that, in both the Notes and her correspondence, Lovelace thus complicates Babbage’s
               intended schematics for the Analytical Engine — as a perfect mediator between
               inspired minds and automatic hands — by extending her ambiguous clerical position to
               her technical writing. She inaugurates an idea of the technologized mathematician’s
               clerk that is both tool and guidance protocol, both programmed and programmer.
         

            Automatic Hands
            During Lovelace’s life, the clerical figure was largely male. However, as Leah Price
               and Pamela Thurschwell write, the iconic late-nineteenth-century
                  female secretary is preceded by the mid-century male clerk; over the
               course of the century, one becomes the other .
               This shift occurs along two timelines: the introduction of women into the labor force
               as social service workers, and the adoption of shorthand notation systems. Susan
               Brown argues that there was a perceived continuity
               between clerical positions and the domestic service roles that women were long
               encultured to occupy . Though shorthand had
               already been invented, it wasn’t until Isaac Pittman’s 1837 book Stenographic Sound-Hand that the practice, which he later called phonography, reached cultural relevance . Ivan Kreilkamp argues that 1837 marked a new phase in English print culture’s relationship to
                  speech. Before phonography, Samuel Johnson paraphrased Parliamentary
               speeches with editorialized flare. Charles Dickens, a close friend of Lovelace and
                  probably the most famous figure ever to combine the
                  secretarial and authorial roles in one person, used an early form of
               shorthand called brachygraphy to record speech at almost natural speed . But while Dickens was able to reminisce
               about his life as a clerk in romantically masculine terms, Pitman’s phonography, a
               more literal translation of sound to text, later replaced these older practices with
               an automatic form of transcription. This more mechanized writing transformed the
               user’s body into either the writing surface or the stylus. As the clerk figure became
               more technologized for the sake of accuracy, the more the position was transformed
               into a writing machine, stripped of intellectual agency and, as many have argued,
               thus feminized. 
            A similar transformation occurs in the figure of the amanuensis, the literary
               assistant who either takes dictation from or copies the work of an author. While most
               clerical labor was still dominated by men during the middle of the century, the
               relationship between an author and their assistant increasingly mapped onto
               heterosexual power structures; over time women’s hands replaced the female muse . John Milton, going blind, dictated his poetry
               to his daughters. Teenage girls, including Elizabeth Pigot, Claire Clairmont, and
               Mary Shelley, more legibly re-penned the scribbles of Lovelace’s estranged father. In
               these relationships, the power dynamics are so starkly drawn the amanuensis
               disappears altogether. She might shape her employer’s intellectual or creative output
               — as Jane Stabler writes, she is often the first editor
                — but gendered notions of the
                  lone genius make invisible her labor; these women are, so to
               speak, reduced to mere writing machines. Like tools, their intellectual contribution
               is measurable only when it breaks
               . Shelley compares the work of an amanuensis
               to wifely servitude, appropriately confusing the female copyist
               or stenographer as both a machine for reproduction and an object for sexual desire.
               As Price and Thurschwell point out, each shares a similar strategy: the reduction of
               the body to its physical rather than intellectual faculties . For the (male) author, the ideal amanuensis was she who, like the
               Silver Lady, carried out her orders with sophisticated articulation and graceful
               motion, but without contributing thoughts of her own. 
            There is a long history of subject-object confusion between women and machines; words
               like typewriter,
               computer, and secretary have at times
               referred to either person or machine (or desk). Friedrich Kittler narrates a queen’s sacrifice, in which the female typewriter replaces
               the female sex object, reduced to a mere functionary — a cog — in the discourse
               network . Idealized secretaries merge conceptually with
               machines because their labor teeters at the edge of sentience: because their
               use-value intersects. When Father Busa teamed up with IBM in the 1950s to make the
                  Index Thomisticus, he chose young women who did not
               know Latin to input the words of Thomas Aquinas onto punch cards because he believed
               their accuracy derived from a lack of familiarity with the material . Melissa Terras and Julianne Nyhan here are
                  quoting Marco Carlo Passarotti of the CIRCSE Research Centre. Terras and Nyhan
                  also point out that the names of the women have not been
                     preserved in the historical record; maybe because the Index Thomisticus was one of the first digital humanities
                  projects, DH projects today often unwittingly reproduce a similar labor structure
                     .  As Turing writes of
               artificial intelligence, only those problems which can be solved
                  by human clerical labour, working to fixed rules, and without
                     understanding [emphasis mine] are capable of
                  solution by the machine
               . At the time, as mental and physical labor
               become separate categories, such a fine line carried extra significance. Beyond
               automata, metaphorical discussions of the master-slave binary only make sense without
               historical realities. The rise of clerical labor, then the rise of computing,
               triggered techno-social metaphors designed to protect the concept of a free thinker
               (the brains) who did not work, and the robotic, unthinking
               laborer (the brawn) who carried out his ideas. This conflation
               of mastery with a certain kind of intelligence — retaining the concept of mastery for
               only educated European men — shadows the rise of automation. The use of loaded
                  jargon (like slave) has recently been reconsidered in science
                  and technical writing, related to ants and programming languages respectively.
                  Though useful in a vacuum, such terms imply analogies between human and nonhuman
                  behaviors. Ron Eglash makes the historical connection between late
                  nineteenth-century uses of slave and
                     servant in engineering (e.g., servomotors and slave
                  clocks) to Charles Babbage, crediting his 1832 book On the
                     Economy of Machinery and Manufactures for popularizing the division of
                  high-level and low-level thinking in labor (Broken Metaphor:
                     The Master-Slave Analogy in Technical Literature, in Technology and Culture Vol. 48 No. 2 (2007), 367). It should also be
                  noted that Black slaves invented many new technologies but did not own their
                  inventions. See: Rayvon Fouché, Black Inventors in the Age of
                     Segregation: Granville T. Woods, Lewis H. Latimer, and Shelby J.
                     Davidson (JHU Press, 2005). The fantasy is the reduction of
               these servile middle-machines until there is no difference
                  between a command given and command completed
               .
            This perfection of mediation is, as theorized by Price and Thurschwell, a fantasy of divorcing transmission from understanding
               . This is the myth of automatic hands; the
                  genius becomes constructed as the opposite of the
                  typist who mindlessly punches keys. The extreme case is
               psychography (or, relatedly, automatic writing), in which a
               writer acts as amanuensis for abstractions (spirits, muses, etc.) through meditative
               states, seances, or trances. For many theorists, this labor relationship is mapped
               onto extant cis- and hetero-gender myths. Jill Galvan suggests that women were
               believed to possess a sympathetic excess that made their
               medial work possible . As Kittler writes,
                  an omnipresent metaphor equated women with the white sheet of
                  nature or virginity onto which a very male stylus could then inscribe the glory of
                  its authorship
               . Plant, paraphrasing, adds: Like all ideal women and machines, secretaries and shorthand typists
                  were only supposed to be processing information which had been produced and
                  organized elsewhere
               . In other words, the ideal secretarial
               figure only processes information but does not contribute to its
               shape. The Bletchley Park Wrens, in this ungenerous view, cracked codes but had no
               knowledge of the messages; they only switched the wires at the back of the machine,
               set the drums to the front, and punched cards. Plant, describing this labor, writes:
                  She hears, but she isn’t listening. She sees, but she does
                  not watch. Pattern recognition without consciousness
               . Extending this to mathematics, any ideal
               calculating machine would not be, as Lady Byron suggested of the Difference Engine, a
                  thinking machine.
         

            The Unthinking Machine
            The mathematician’s clerk belongs to this history, too. While not quite the same use
               of automatic hands — performing calculations rather than recording or copying — all
               such activities become optimized in the nineteenth century. Gaspard de Prony’s
               logarithmic tables allowed young clerks, with little education, to complete in days
               what mathematicians once did longhand over months . Though this was rote arithmetic, like Johnson at Parliament,
               accuracy was a problem. Before equations were solved, one small human error might
               force the computer to start over. (An extreme example is William Shanks, who spent
               his life calculating the digits of Pi and, after one
               mistake, spent the last 20 years doing it incorrectly.) Prony’s tables allowed these
               clerks, like recorders using phonography, to calculate without understanding the
               higher mathematics — but they did not eliminate the need for sharp, focused minds.
               Babbage’s engines, in theory, did. Calculation is not, like recording, just the
               remediation of information. But it can be expressed as an equation: the conversion of
               a logical inquiry into a notational language which can then, according to set rules,
               be processed into numerical expression. If Babbage’s engines worked, the mental labor
               required to perform logarithmic arithmetic could be scripted and thus reliably
               accurate. Like the stenographer, the platonic ideal of the mathematician’s clerk
               speeds up transcription and computes without error the desires of the philosopher;
               this dream machine would perfectly mediate a given equation or logic problem into its
               solution.
            The Analytical Engine was born of this dream. Babbage premised his earlier invention
               on the idea that the labored monotony of arithmetical calculations required a machine
               to become a substitute for one of the lowest operations of human
                  intellect (Letter to Humphry Davy, 1822). This substitution was, for
               Babbage and in accordance with the clerical ideal, to reduce errors and save time.
               But his first attempt at the steam-powered clerk was not good enough. As Menabrea
               puts it in Lovelace’s translation, the chief drawback of earlier
               calculating engines — the need for continual human intervention — provided a source of errors. The new Engine corrected this flaw with
               a punch card system, inspired by the jacquard loom, which allowed the Analytical
               Engine to spare intellectual labour, insure rigid accuracy, and maintain an economy
                  of time
               . Lovelace emphasizes the object
                  of the engine in her Notes: to achieve the
                  utmost practical efficiency
                  (Note E); reduce to a minimum
                  the time necessary for completing the calculation
                  (Note D); and finally annihilate the necessity for the intervention of human intelligence during the
                  performance of its calculations such that there is
                  much less chance of error, and likewise far less expenditure of time and
                  labour (Note A). The Engine thus embodies the
               desires of its era to perfectly mediate one expression (inspired
                  minds) into an output via a clerical function (automatic
                  hands), demonstrating how social power dynamics influence and become
               reflected in technological design.
            I argue also that the more technical details within the Engine’s design are
               influenced by the clerical history above. Regarding how the engine is programmed, for
               instance, some of the punch cards required are not so different than shorthand; the
                  Operation Cards are, Menabrea explains, merely a translation of the four algebraical notations (+,
               −, ×, and ÷) — linguistic symbols turned binary via punched holes. As Dionysus
               Lardner writes, once the question is translated into algebraical
                  signs and reduced to an equation, the
               algebraicist is relieved from the consideration of the
                  complicated relations of the quantities
               . Human intellectual labor stops at the communication of
               the equation in natural language; the cards then consign the
                  execution to the machine . This
               input system is more complex than that, as I will discuss later, but it relies on a
               key premise from Note G: The
                  Analytical Engine has no pretensions whatever to originate
                  anything. It can do whatever we know how to order it
                  to perform. It can follow analysis; but it has no
                  power of anticipating any analytical relations or truths.
                  Its province is to assist us in making available what we
                  are already acquainted with.  This passage, which Turing refers to as
                  Lady Lovelace’s Objection, is often read in the
               context of artificial intelligence .
               Lovelace reaffirms Menabrea’s claim that the machine is not a
                  thinking being, but simply an automaton which acts according to the laws imposed
                  upon it. Like the Silver Lady, the machine servilely follows a script.
               Once instructed to begin, it will continue to behave in a singular manner until
               instructed to stop. As Lovelace explains, the punch cards activate a series of different states [...] the adding state, or the multiplying
                     state, &c. (Note B). Once the
               Engine is placed into a state, it will remain in that state
               until instructed otherwise. This demonstrates the machine’s lack of sentience, that
               it cannot originate, but also describes its activity as
               automatic and even trance-like.
            In that often-unquoted final sentence, the expressed purpose of the engine —
                  to assist us in merely making available
               the already known — skips over the actual labor of the machine, erasing the
               difference between commands given and tasks completed. Similar to how the LISP
               function Hello, World delivers input to output without
               ever reading what’s bracketed within quotation marks, according
               to Lovelace here, the Engine does not ever interpret its input data: It is mere
               pattern recognition without consciousness. It is an amanuensis exactly remediating
               the intellectual product of its author. It is no different than the
               technology-assisted knowledge work in digital humanities that is often relegated to
                  support rather than scholarship by the tradition of academia . In this instance, Lovelace seems to agree with Babbage and
               Menabrea that the Analytical Engine has reduced mathematics to a kind of
               frictionless, algebraic stenography. The Analytical Engine is the
                  brawn which serves as the seamless extension of the
               mathematician’s master mind, so limited in its capacity to shape
               the process along the way that it can only make available that
               which a human already dictated.
         

            The Ghost Writer
            Lovelace often positioned herself, at least on the surface, as a servile clerk. Her
               correspondence with Babbage between 1835 and 1852 paints a deferential role to the
               mathematician. When she first offers him her services with the Analytical Engine on
               January 12, 1841, Lovelace hopes that my head may be made by you
                  subservient to some of your purposes & plans, framing herself as an
               object, a tool — a brain just like the Engine is a brain. Upon completing her Notes, she writes again to say: I give
                  to you the first choice & offer of my services & my intellect
               (Letter to Babbage, August 15, 1843). A letter of unknown date reads: I am willing to give myself wholly to your
                     interests. These words often undermine her contributions to his
               project. Plant writes that Lovelace is remembered as Charles
                  Babbage’s voice, expressing his ideas with levels of clarity, efficiency and
                  accuracy he could never have mustered himself
               . She was the custodian of his work, but in
               Lovelace’s correspondence it was usually his work, his ideas,
               written in her hand. She perhaps felt as Shelley did while working for Byron: under filial and philosophical obligation to subordinate her
                  personal pain — and her own talent — to assisting the man of genius
               . When writing the Notes, Lovelace read them aloud to Babbage at his home so that he may
               doublecheck that they reflected his ideas — to perfect their mediation (Lovelace,
               Letter to Babbage, July 10, 1843). But the partnership between Lovelace and Babbage
               was also, beneath the surface, a complicated labor relationship. This section will
               show that while her intentions as an ideal clerical assistant might be true, Lovelace
               troubles the distinctions between knowledge and its imagined application.
            Perfect mediation was also the goal of her translation: to get across Menabrea’s
               words as accurately and with as little editorial paraphrasing as possible. Lovelace’s
               proficiency in French was such that she was able to do just that — at least, by the
               standards of translation. Like a ghostwriter — that phenomenon
               which arises with the figure of the secretary — Lovelace at first seemed content to
               write for but give the full credit of authorship to Menabrea in language and Babbage
               in concept. As Babbage explains later in his autobiography, Lovelace never intended
               to do more than play their unseen infrastructure; after she finished the translated
               portion of the Sketch, Babbage asked why she had not herself written an original paper on a subject with which
                  she was so intimately acquainted? To this Lady Lovelace replied that the thought
                  had not occurred to her
               . She had erased herself from the publication of these
               men’s ideas. Partly due the social limitations conditioned into her gender — even at
               her station, she was not allowed to attend college and was criticized for having
               opinions about mathematics — and partly due to the opinion amongst her class that
               putting one’s name on literary work was overly commercial, she hadn’t considered
               writing her own paper or appendices. She only decided to add her initials to the
               published document after her husband’s encouragement (Lovelace to Babbage, July 4,
               1843). Outside of A.A.L., the only evidence of her
               presence in the Notes is the use of the pronoun we: We have dwelt considerably […] We
                  are desirous […] We refer the reader […] (Note
                  A). For the most part, she is a ghostly figure which haunts the text in
               effort to better usher forth its message.
            It is no coincidence that interest in the paranormal increases as technologies turn
               cultural transmission invisible. Galvan identifies the 1830s as the moment when these
               interests spike; with the telegraph and photography also came the rise, due to their
                  sympathetic excess and capacity for automatism, of
                  mediating women both occult and occupational . Consider Lovelace’s description of herself as
               a Prophetess. In a letter to her mother toward the end
               of her life, as her health deteriorated and medication increased, Lovelace
               annihilates her own presence in her work (November 11, 1844): 
            You know I am not a bit my own agent as to my scientific progress
                  & objects. I am simply the instrument for the divine
                  purposes to act on & thro’; [...] Like the Prophets of
                  old, I shall but speak the voice I am inspired with. [...] The only merit that can ever be due to me, is
                  that of putting myself, & maintaining myself, in such a
                  state (physically & mentally) that God & His agents, can use me as their vocal organ for the ears of
                  mortals.
            As in psychography, Lovelace here imagines herself as both writing surface and stylus
                  (on & thro’). She is the
               blank sheet of female nature and the transcribing stylus that only communicates the
                  voice dictated to her, a phonetic functionary for the
               discourse of God & His agents (carried out, like the
               Wrens, without her knowing the message). She is only the technology, the vocal organ, for these ghostly geniuses. Most stunning is
               the reduction of her own abilities — her energetic writing style, her mathematical
               knowhow, and her reportedly flawless French — to a knack for entering and
                  maintaining a series of automated
                  states, a description eerily like the Analytical Engine by
               her own writing. Her script is her inspiration, and her merit is
               her ability to unwaveringly follow its instructions. 
            Not only does this language reduce Lovelace’s head to its cybernetic utility, due its
               similarity to the object of her Notes, Lovelace’s
               figurative ghostwriting suggests a cultural exchange between fantasies around
               gendered secretarial labor, calculating engines, and even Romantic literature. While
               Lord Byron used amanuenses, other poets preferred a different kind of remediation.
               Imogen Forbes-Macphail has written on the way constructions of imagination in
               Romantic poetry share affinities with Lovelace’s approach to mechanism.  points out, for instance, how Samuel Taylor
               Coleridge’s poetic sensibility has at times been defined as a
               kind of automation in which the poet has nothing to do with [the
                  composition]; the poet only looked on, while the
                  blind causes, the only true artists, were unfolding themselves.
               Forbes-Macphail suggests further that this poetic sensibility lies not in the active will of the poet or thinker, but rather in the passive
                  qualities of their constitution which allow them to be more receptive and
               thus more perfect a mediation of that poetic input. Lovelace’s statement that the
               Engine cannot originate is thus inseparable from notions
               of a blind poetic receptibility . Here the intelligent design of the
               poet, the technical design of the Engine, and the capacity of medial women or
               clerical figures for sympathetic excess converge as a
               kind of pure infrastructure. In any science of
                  operations, whether poetry or engineering, data is processed and then
               delivered as output. The minimization of that process — when the output nearly
               matches the input (e.g., Hello, World) — is for these
               poets, for the Engine, and for Lovelace in the above self-portrait, a mode of
               virtuous authorship.
         

            The Discoverer
            But Lovelace’s labor also rejects clerical ideals. Her mediation is, notably,
               imperfect. Before starting the Notes, she sent a
               translation she’d written to Lord Lovelace (of a German ballad by Friedrich
               Schiller), adding the following disclaimer: I cannot call it
                  either a translation; for (except the first stanza, which is rather close), it is
                  entirely different from the original (April 1842). Like Shelley’s tortured
               manuscripts of Byron’s scribbles, Lovelace’s translations emerge
                  as creative acts in their own right
               . The same writerly intervention can be said
               of Menabrea’s memoir; the translation of Menabrea’s original text is around 8,000
               words, but the Notes are around 20,000. Plant suggests
               that Lovelace’s footnotes retain the hierarchal divisions between centers and margins, authors and scribes,
               but also that paratextual spaces have historically allowed female typists to deviate
               from the communication of men’s thoughts .
               In those Notes, Lovelace excels the imagination of
               Babbage and Menabrea. She crosses the threshold between the machine’s capacity for
               only calculation and, due the symbolic substitution of any kind of information in
               place of numbers, the possibility of general-purpose computing — what is called
                  Lovelace’s Leap.
                In response to claims of her emotional stability and mathematical amateurism,
                  scholars who defend Lovelace’s historical significance refer to the creative
                  thinking which she provided and which Babbage seemed to lack. Lovelace’s Leap usually describes her impulse to ask what if. Even Doron Swade, who has marginalized Lovelace’s role in the
                  past, argued in an interview for the documentary To Dream
                     Tomorrow that What Lovelace saw […] was that
                     numbers could represent entities other than quantity
                  . She suggests that because the Engine
                  might act upon non-number variables, it might produce things besides numbers if
                  those original variables (notes, colors, etc.) shared a relationship expressible
                  by algebraical operation.  A reconsideration of Lovelace’s positionality
               complicates whether the interpretess can call her Notes a translation. She gives
               her service and intellect
               to Babbage’s interests,
               purposes & plans, but the master she serves, if we
               look closely at her choice of words, is more the Engine than the man; she hopes to
               help unfold the blind causes of automated calculation
               itself.
            It is worth noting that Babbage did not ask Lovelace to produce a translation. Like
               Mephistopheles offering to become Faust’s assistant, Lovelace did not inform Babbage
               until a draft was finished. When I refer to Lovelace as a secretarial figure, I am
               invoking not the ideal clerical function that Babbage and Menabrea imagined the
               Engine to embody but the more ambiguous figure — the one who is imagined as an
               ignorant operator but instead threatens the authority of the
                  genius by virtue of her own contributions. Lovelace, too, is
               an author. She is an author in the tradition of women who translated works by men to
               enter masculine spaces. I am referring to women, like Elizabeth Cary, who
                  translated Italian plays in Early Modern England, and works of science from one
                  European language to another; famously, Emilie du Chatelet translated Isaac
                  Newton, Clemence Royer translated Charles Darwin, Anna Helmholtz translated
                  Tyndall, and Marie-Anne Paulze Lavoisier translated her husband. Mary Somerville’s
                  entry into the elite scientific societies of London was based on her translation
                  of Pierre-Simon Laplace’s Traité de mécanique
                     celeste (or The Mechanism of the
                  Heavens, 1831), only after which she was able to publish her own work,
                  starting with the very successful On the Connexion of the
                     Physical Sciences (1834). She was similar in position to her
               close friend, Mary Somerville, who described her translation work not unlike
               Lovelace’s instrument — as pure mediation. Such rhetoric has
               traditionally served as a strategy for women to assume authority over a subject while
               calling their authorship by another name. Women authors had to choose between a
               limited readership, mediumship, or other forms of anonymity — as another of
               Lovelace’s friends, Joanna Baillie, knew well — each allowing self-expression within
               their limited literary avenues. Lovelace wrote poems, hoped to write books on flying
               machines, and pitched more articles after her Notes. She
               referred to her own writing style, likely with her father in mind, as pithy & vigorous with a half-satirical & humorous dryness (Lovelace, Letter to Babbage,
               undated). She wrote to her mother that she will in due time be a
                  Poet (January 11, 1841). Likely she feigned sympathetic excess or humility
               as cover for her desire to write what she thought.
            Her contribution was more than her Leap. It was Lovelace that kept a contract with
               the printer, who had the final call on what would be included in Taylor’s Scientific Memoirs (and exercised that power to exclude a note
               Babbage wanted to add). She was nobility to his nouveau riche and, frankly, Babbage
               was an impulsive genius who needed reining in. She even fixed his errors.
                  Babbage remembered that Lovelace sent back the Bernoulli calculations he had done
                  for her, having detected a grave mistake which I had made in
                     the process
                  . The nature of this mistake is not
                  known, but this anecdote reaffirms why the machine was invented. She had also once
                  criticized the published work of her tutor, Augustus de Morgan, and was proven
                  correct years later. She performed for Babbage the many
                  soft skills — marketing, debugging, updating, even emotional
               labor, etc. — that are often assigned to women and erased from
                  the history of technology
               . She was both writer and editor and, as
               such, referred to the Notes as her own, including
               calling them a child of mine (Letter to Babbage, July
               27, 1843). Lovelace’s Leap, and the vantage of her positionality, further complicate
               any attempt to boil down the invention of the Engine to any single great
                  man. She, too, drafted Babbage’s Engine beyond his instructions; where
               Babbage’s draftsman Joseph Clement did so with measurements and materials, Lovelace
               designed a user experience with analytical and imaginative faculties. She is, with
               Babbage, Clement, and Menabrea, an author of the virtual
                  machine. The Analytical Engine was never built, and unlike the Difference
                  Engine, it was never drafted with consistent enough technical detail to provide
                  functional blueprints. It existed only in the minds of Babbage, his principal
                  draftsman Joseph Clement, and Lovelace. It exists today only as an idea, scattered
                  across Babbage’s journals, and most definitively in Lovelace’s words. Indeed, the
                     Sketch serves as the blueprints Babbage never
                  published; Allen Bromley writes that, aside from the
                     Bernoulli numbers program prepared for Ada Lovelace’s notes, there is no
                     evidence that Babbage prepared any user programs for the Analytical Engine
                     after his 1840 trip to Turin. (Allan Bromley
                     Explores Babbage’s Analytical Engine Plans 28 and 28a, IEEE Annals of
                  the History of Computing, 2000, 11). By 1837 Babbage had produced many stereotype
                  plates. He distributed them but never published them, and they are far from
                  complete. All this said, like Maxwell’s demon, Schrodinger’s cat, and Sadi
                  Carnot’s engine, the Engine is a thought exercise that has launched its own
                  discourse.  Despite her gender, Lovelace’s class and fame afforded her
               power. She had her own copyist. She designed the diagrams in pencil and, as she wrote
               to Babbage, They have been made out with extreme care and all
                  the indices most minutely and scrupulously attended to. Lord L is at this moment
                  kindly inking it all over for me (July 2, 1843). In this moment (and
               presumably others), hers is the intellectual work, and her husband becomes the
               automatic hands. When she refers to herself, in a September 15, 1843 letter to her
               mother, as the High-Priestess of Babbage’s Engine, she
               assumes the role of the inspired mind. When Babbage signs a letter to her, Your faithful slave, he places her on a different kind of
               pedestal than his Silver Lady (September 12, 1843). The translator excels her
               translated, and the power binary which later is used to define Turing and his Wrens
               is reversed.
             In an essay she wrote on January 5, 1841, Lovelace asks, What
                  is Imagination? In the essay, she defines imagination as that which penetrates into the unseen worlds around us, the world of
                  science, and she argues that scientists are those who
                  have learned to walk on the threshold of the unknown worlds. The sentiment
               echoes the moment Babbage first announced his idea for the Analytical Engine; in her
               journal, Lady Byron described the inventor as if he stood on a sublime precipice and
               quoted him comparing his new Engine to throwing a bridge from
                  the known to the unknown world
               . For Lovelace, the machine itself served
               as a such a bridge, a mechanism of automation harnessed as a tool for imagination. To
               her mother, Lovelace wrote that she believed herself to possess
                  a most singular combination of qualities exactly fitted to make me pre-eminently a discoverer of the hidden
                     realities of nature (July 30, 1843). When she ghostwrote for the
                  true artists (providing those mechanisms of automation on her
               own), her goal was to reveal or express what was hidden or inexpressible. She
               believed science, metaphysics, and poetry were synonymous practices, and to that end,
               she considered herself as imaginative as her father. Lovelace famously asks in Note A: what if the fundamental
                  relations of pitched sounds in the science of harmony and of musical composition
                  were susceptible of [the punch card system’s] expression and adaptations?
               This digression, one of her more powerful leaps, counters the
               idea that the Engine will only assist us in making available what we are already acquainted with.
            This creative streak is not separate from mathematical ability. Though some critics
               have accused Lovelace of amateurism, she had, according to Babbage (via poet Henry
               Reed), a peculiar capability, higher, he said, than that of
                  anyone he knew, to prepare the descriptions connected to his calculating
                  machines
               . To describe the Engine in her Notes, she had to guess at Babbage’s intent, drawing on
               their conversations, public lectures, and his contradictory and incomplete
               blueprints. When she made errors, they were missed guesses at Babbage’s mind, not bad
               math; much of what she was surmising in the Notes was
                  impossible […] to know by intuition (Babbage to
               Lovelace, July 2, 1843). Like programmers executing scripts in a test environment,
               Lovelace tested her ideas against the inventor’s whims. She designed without a script
               the innerworkings of the virtual machine, an exercise John Fuegi and Jo Francis
               describe as being of almost inconceivable difficulty,
               and she did so well enough that Babbage learned something new about his invention
                  . Lovelace possessed a clarity of
               technological vision, a (dare I say poetic) talent for
               translating imagination into clearly articulated technical documents. She was an
               expert in what we now call critical making, the combination of
               an individual’s ideas with their collaborative application , and that is perhaps her greatest Leap. By
               virtue of having written the Notes with such
                  peculiar capability, Lovelace resists becoming the clerical
               function she describes herself as serving. Her oscillations between clerk and
               inventor parallel debates around Lovelace’s contributions to computer science; it is
               a positionality which destabilizes her historical memory and is embodied in her
                  science of operations.
            
         

            The Meaning of Note G
            
            
            
               A = Number of Operation ; B = Nature of Operation ; source: the Diagram of
                     Operations.
               
               First row of Lovelace’s Diagram of
                  Operations
            

            For full diagram: https://www.fourmilab.ch/babbage/figures/menat6_2k.png.
            Note G defines a virtual engine with a series of
               mathematical operations: the steps through which the engine
                  could compute the Numbers of Bernoulli and specifically the value (either numerical or algebraical) of any nth Number of Bernoulli B2n-1, in terms of all the
                     preceding ones, if we but know the values of B1, B3…B2n-3. Those
               steps are visualized by a large table with columns that represent the input (Data), process (Nature of
                  Operation), intermediate results (Working
                  Variables) and output (Result Variables) that
               would occur during the calculation of B7 (according to a hypothetical scenario in
               which the Engine had just completed the calculations of B5). The table’s rows, except
               for certain repetitions (as discussed below), represent every step, or change of
               state. The variables (V) each represent a location in the machine’s memory where a
               value is pulled or inscribed; in Figure 1, for instance, after 1V2 and 1V3 are multiplied, the result is designated to be inscribed
               onto three separate locations (1V4, 1V5, 1V6) to be used again in a future step. At
               first glance, what this program does is culturally
               uninteresting. As an expression, the eighth Bernoulli number (-1/30) does not mean
               much. But, because Lovelace writes the diagram for human
               readers, even at its most technical Note G remains a
               text with embedded extra meanings. Unsurprisingly, the program has been studied
               extensively for its affinities to today’s software. Curious programmers, for
               instance, have translated the diagram into modern programming languages (including C,
               Python, and FORTRAN). In a 1979 Russian study titled The
                     Babbage Machine and the Origins of Programming, A. K. Petrenko and O.
                  L. Petrenko translate the algorithm into a 65-line FORTRAN program. More recently,
                  Jim Randell translated the diagram into Python, which he describes in a blog post
                  titled Ada Lovelace, Charles Babbage and the First Computer
                     Program (December 8, 2015): http://jimpulse.blogspot.com/2015/12/ada-lovelace-charles-babbage-and-first.html.
                  Sinclair Target translated the program into C for his blog Two Bit History, in a post titled What did Ada
                     Lovelace’s Program Actually Do? (August 18, 2018): https://twobithistory.org/2018/08/18/ada-lovelace-note-g.html. Following
                  Lovelace’s comment on music, D. De Roure and P. Willcox built a web-based app for
                  the Engine to produce music: http://numbersintonotes.net/. And John Walker for Fourmilab Switzerland developed a web emulator for the Engine in Java:
                     https://www.fourmilab.ch/babbage/emulator.html. But while these
               studies venture into human contexts, imagining a social history of computer
               programming that begins before the twentieth century, none consider the gendered
               labor structures built into that code and inherited from
               nineteenth-century clerical figures. 
            To start, it’s worth considering why Lovelace chose this equation over others. She
               wrote to Babbage: I want to put in something about Bernoulli’s
                  Numbers in one of my Notes as an example of how an implicit function may be worked
                  out by the engine without having been worked out by human head or hands
                  first (July 10, 1843). She was familiar with the equation because she had
               studied it during her lessons with Augustus de Morgan, and she knew the Engine could
                  handle the calculation because Babbage boasted as much
               (Letter to Alexander von Humboldt, January 1842). The aim was to demonstrate, beyond
               mere facility of computation, how a many-step calculation would
               look without the possibility of human error. In some ways this
                  example is yet another expression of the Engine as a clerical
               substitute; but it is an extreme case, chosen because the faculties required to
               quickly calculate this equation exceeded human head or hands.
               The Bernoulli numbers jumpstarted the clerical function beyond stenography and
               arithmetic to the start of something new, a precipice of true automatic computing. As
               Lorrain Daston writes, The analytical intelligence applied to
                  making human machine cooperation in calculation work was a rehearsal for an
                  activity that would become known first as Operations Research and later computer
                  programming
               . As Chun writes about a different moment in
               time, One could say that programming became programming and
                  software when the command structure shifted from commanding a ‘girl’ to commanding
                  a machine
               . But this conclusion, in which software is
               defined as feminine and clerical, does not seem to apply to Lovelace as unambiguously
               as Turing described the Wrens. It assumes divisions between knowing and making that
               Lovelace erodes in her Notes. This section asks: What
               can be said differently about the command structures built into code’s origins if
               those origins can be traced back to the diagram of Lovelace?
            There is something of Lovelace’s imagination in Note G,
               too. Even the selection of the Bernoulli numbers seems to bear on her life and
               foresight. Lovelace would have known the equation’s application for predicting random
               probability, herself having been quite interested in the potential for mathematics to
               solve games of chance. Today, the equation is used to calculate the flow of air or
               liquid across space, specifically for determining the value of points along the path
               of that motion. Since the equation’s discovery at the end of the seventeenth century,
               its application had only grown in importance, from building dams to estimating the
               structures of stars and galaxies — as Lovelace defined the scientific imagination,
                  penetrat[ing] into the unseen worlds around us.
               Pertinent to Lovelace, who once wanted to write a book on flyology, the equation would become integral for determining the airflow
               across the wing of an airplane and designing the exhaust of the Apollo rockets.
                  Note G forecasts the ability of machines to make
               calculations at scales large enough to accomplish such innovations. It is a
               demonstration of the Engine’s potential for universality and scalability. Lovelace
               defines an operation as any process which alters the mutual relation of
                     two or more things, a definition that includes all subjects in the universe (Note
                  A). The expression of an equation as real-world applicable as Bernoulli’s
               via mechanical operation opens the utility of the Engine
               to those unfathomable futures. It is the taming of all subjects
                  in the universe into malleable things, the
               sublime movements of sound and stars into punched cards.
            
               But is it code, really? The question is definitional. Herman
               H. Goldstine and John von Neumann argue that code is not simply a translation from
               the language of mathematics — the numerical procedure by which
                  [the programmer] has decided to solve problem — into machine instruction
                  . Others have defined code as a symbolic
               set of signals given meaning only once compiled or executed. These are the two
                  main arguments against the diagram’s definition as code, and
                  they are both contested positions. For one, the difference between machine and
                  higher-level code — the difference between an algorithm to solve an equation and
                  an abstracted, linguistic command — is mostly about proximity to hardware. The
                  idea that code is only code if it is executable may make some theoretical sense; a
                  programmer is produced through the act of programming
                  and a source code only becomes a source after the
                     fact
                  . But in practice, code is often not
                  executed and sometimes designed as such (e.g., code poetry). Thomas J.
               Misa, to avoid these semantics, describes the Engine as reconfigurable
               . Scholars, citing the text of Note G, refer to the diagram as an execution trace, a log of the sequence of operations performed by the
               Engine ; indeed, Lovelace described it as a complete simultaneous view of all the successive changes
                  [necessary] to perform the computation. Others, attending more to the
               program’s intent, compare the table to opcode, or the
               parts of assembly language which pertain to machine instruction . Each of these positions is defensible — and the
               anachronism prevents any conclusion. But at the very least, the program shares both
               purpose and behaviors with computer programming. The latter is best illustrated by
               its famous error:
            
               A = Number of Operation ; B = Nature of Operation.
               
               Rows 2–4 of Lovelace’s Diagram of
                  Operations
            

            For the fourth operation, as recorded in Figure 2, Lovelace lists the Variables acted upon as 2V5 ÷ 2V4, or the resulting value of
               the third operation (as saved in the second position of the fifth Variable column) divided by the result of the second operation (saved in the
               second position of the fourth column). As many mathematicians have pointed out, this
               equation should be written the other way around: 2V4 ÷ 2V5. The error is likely one
               of typesetting — maybe even a copying mistake by Lord Lovelace — because the other
               columns, both the Statement of Results and the Working Variable (0V11), reflect the correct order: (2n-1) ÷ (2n+1). Perhaps for that reason,
               the arbitrarily misplaced letter or number, rather than a mistake in mathematics, we
               might consider this typo in Note G the oldest bug in computing
               . It is an error which reveals the contributions of
               otherwise transparent support infrastructure.
            The error highlights similarities between the subjectivity of Lovelace and future
               coders. In interviews, multiple programmers have shared that Note G resembles the experience of
                  programming; Sinclair Target, for instance, told me the exercise reminded
               him of introductory programming classes (just with different variables), that even
               today many early lessons in computer programming ask students to write code for the
               calculation of a sequence, usually Fibonacci . Code’s
               abstraction from hardware means there is always some level of ignorance in
               programming; the coder simultaneously occupies the subject position of both commander
               and guesser. Arguably, the programmer’s ignorance of
                  the path of decision-making within [her] own program
               later becomes definitive to how software works (Joseph Weizenbaum, qtd. by ). It mixes pattern
                  recognition without consciousness with the inspired
                  mind, not unlike the way Lovelace describes her own work. Babbage, in
               accordance with Enlightenment notions of experiential knowledge, invites audiences to
               watch his Difference Engine grind and gnaw from the outside. In Note G, Lovelace flips the reader’s position such that they share her
               own, like the Romantic poet, thinking the machine from within. We join with Lovelace
               as she remains servile to Babbage’s designs yet contributes creatively to and writes
               commands for its virtual application. We can see that there is room for her critical
               imagination, that any programmer creates their own unknown worlds even as they are
               burdened by the designed worlds of others. Lovelace thus inaugurates in Note G a strange, new labor position, a relationship between
               humans and machines that threads the needle between multiple levels of authorship and
               clerical functions. 
            
               LOOP
               The actual code implied by Note G — the decks of
                  punch cards which input data and inform the Engine to change state — was never
                  produced. Lovelace writes a program without a programming language, but one which
                  anticipates its translation; her Notes describe in
                  detail the interplay of Operation Cards with Variable Cards, Number
                  Cards, et al. The following endnotes provide an explanation of the
                     punch card system, paraphrasing Lovelace’s translation, both her and Menabrea’s
                     words (with help from other works cited in this paper). While Babbage only
                     describes two types of punch cards in his journals, by the time the Notes are written, there are at least three. Operation Cards determine the algebraic state (add,
                     multiply, etc.). Variable Cards inform the machine
                     which columns (V’s) in the Store to fetch values
                     from and deliver intermediate results to. These are alternately expressed by
                     Lovelace as either Supplying Cards or Receiving Cards, of which there are usually three per
                     operation. For instance, if the machine needs to add together variables A + B
                     to make C, an Operation Card will activate the
                        addition state, two Variable Cards will supply A and B by
                     designating the two columns where they are stored, and a third Variable Card will identify a third column to receive the calculated sum C (at which point the
                     calculation will end, or C can be further used as a new variable in a future
                     operation). These Variable Cards contain
                     additional information, such as whether the column should be reset to zero
                     after the calculation is complete, whether the number should be toggled between
                     positive and negative, and whether the column should be treated as a quantity
                     or, in the case of indices of power, types of operations (in which case Variable
                        Cards are called upon to act as Operation
                        Cards). Rather than pointing to columns, Number
                        Cards, Menabrea explains, specify an actual number (or algebraic
                     expression); these cards are used for timesaving: For example, by having a
                     complex value such as Pi already expressed by
                     punch card, the Engine is saved from calculating Pi every time it is needed to determine a circumference. This
                     would allow the Engine to, for instance, calculate the next Bernoulli number
                     without having to calculate the preceding one.  At its most elementary
                  level, the Operation Cards determine the state —
                  e.g., divide or add —
                  while Variable Cards identify the Variables acted upon and the Variables receiving results. For instance, in Figure 2, the fourth
                  operation required an Operation Card to activate the
                     divide state, two Variable
                     Cards to pull the values 2V5 and 2V4 from memory, another Variable Card to deliver the operation result to 0V11,
                  and two more Variable Cards to instruct the Engine to
                  reset V4 and V5 once the operation is complete (by returning their values to
                  zero). This system makes possible the separation of the Engine’s memory from its
                  operations. But this was far from the most advanced capability of Babbage’s
                  design. The reason the diagram is considered a forerunner to modern programming is
                  the Engine’s capacity (using a fourth kind of punch card, Combinatorial Cards) to designate sequences of punch cards to repeat on command: to cause the prism
                     over which the train of pattern-cards is suspended to revolve backwards instead of forwards in order
                  to bring the card or set of cards in question into play a
                     second time and thus re-perform a sequence of operations (Note C). These cycles, like the aforementioned states, are executed automatically, reducing the number
                  of total cards required and allowing more symmetry and
                     simplicity in the arrangements (Note G).
                  Babbage called this eating its own tail. A
                     possible fourth type of punch card, called Combinatorial
                        Cards, are the least explained in published materials but probably
                     the closest approximate to code. These cards are instructions to the Engine for
                     manipulating the other processes. If all punch cards used in a calculation
                     enter a library — a sort of holding area, or cache —
                        Combinatorial Cards can manipulate the prism to
                     access those already used cards and/or skip others. As Lovelace explains in the
                        Notes, because punch cards are entered into the
                     Engine in a particular order, the Combinatorial
                        Cards can do two things: (1) enter the prism into a reverse or forward state,
                     and (2) set an end variable so the machine knows when to return to normal
                     function. As Plant points out, The cards were selected by
                        the machine as it needed them and effectively functioned as a filing system,
                        allowing the machine to store and draw on its own information
                     . This greatly reduced the number of
                     cards required; the calculation of the eighth Bernoulli number required under
                     100. All used input cards function as an accessible memory bank, a cache
                  or library of performable operations that can be re-accessed again without human
                  intervention.
               
               
                  The opening brace ({) identifies which sequences of operations will
                     repeat. 
                  
                  Rows 13–23 of Lovelace’s Diagram of
                        Operations
               
               It is this mnemonic structure that makes possible the Engine’s capacity, to use a
                  modern parlance, to perform a while LOOP. When
                  programmers praise Lovelace’s diagram, they refer to the GO-TO statements and
                  IF-THEN branching in its logic, but especially the capacity of the diagram to
                  repeat a pattern based on external input (iteration) and internal logic
                  (recursion) for predetermined durations. As Wilfried Hou Je Bek points out,
                     the term LOOP denotes a vast chain of beings (iterators, GO TO statements with
                     passing arguments, count-controlled loops, condition-controlled loops,
                     collection-controlled loops, tail-end recursion, enumerators, continuations,
                     generators, Lambda forms, et al.) . It includes two parts that are no different in function but different in
                     cause and feel: iteration and incursion. The PERL glossary defines iteration as doing something
                        repeatedly. The entry for recursion
                     begins: The art of defining something in terms of
                        itself, and ends: [Recursion] often works out
                        okay in computer programs if you’re careful not to recurse forever, which is
                        like an infinite loop with more spectacular failure modes.
                  Lovelace’s diagram lists 25 operations but, as indicated by the three braces ({)
                  in Figure 3, some of those operations (13-23) are designated to be performed
                  twice, with operations 13-16 and 17-20 each repeating within the parent LOOP. The
                  diagram implies but does not explicate the use of Combinatorial Cards, added to operations 16, 20, and 23, which would
                  activate the Engine’s reverse state for a
                  predetermined number of rotations (and under certain conditions). The necessary
                  repetitions for computing numbers of Bernoulli required Lovelace, as she intended,
                  to show just how flexible the punch card system could be. Dana Angluin suggests
                  that the equation’s complexity led to the development of some
                     of the more subtle and powerful concepts, e.g., looping and indexing
                  . While the Engine’s capacity for
                  recursion might not resemble software today, the flexibility of the punch card
                  system — the programmer’s ability to set the variables determining the parameters
                  of the LOOP: when to start and stop rewinding or skipping — allows for infinite
                  free play between the Engine’s library and its operations. The idea that a machine
                  could retain information but also alter that information —
                  reorder or partially repeat — was a century ahead of its time; this was both
                  stylus and a writing pad, which self-erased and self-inscribed. Lovelace’s
                  approach to the challenge of the equation illustrated and developed the Engine’s
                  potential as a general-purpose machine. Babbage is credited with inventing
                     the general-purpose computer for the same reasons that the Analytical Engine is
                     different than the Difference Engine and the Silver Lady. Those automatons each
                     have single states: add or dance. But the Analytical Engine allows for both
                     variables and different states. While a washing machine allows for settings
                     (hot and cold) and uses multiple states (rinse and spin), the Engine, due the
                     programmer’s ability to set values, branch, and loop, allows for an infinite
                     amount of free play between variables and states. It is
                     that quality which, in addition to her Leap, Lovelace expresses so beautifully
                     in the Notes — an illustration of the Engine as
                        the material expression of any indefinite function of
                        any degree of generality and complexity (Note
                        A). As Angluin put it, There in [the 1843
                        paper], a century before its time, is the concept of a general-purpose
                        digital computer, developed to an amazing degree of sophistication
                     . It is no windup danseuse;
                  once preset, it could be let loose. 
                Of course, this is all theoretical — or, as Lovelace terms it, experimental. When asked whether
                  the Engine is really even able to follow such a program, she responds that only
                  seeing is believing (Note G). Per Goldstine and
                  Neumann, it is impossible to foresee in advance and
                     completely the actual course of a program; coding is the technique of providing a dynamic background to control [only]
                     the automatic evolution of a meaning
                  . To put it another way: The Engine’s
                  pathways are rigid, but full of so many twists and turns that it becomes
                  abstracted, that it resembles thought enough to give the impression of taking
                  control, of becoming its own guidance system. The artist Wilfried Hou Je Bek
                  describes a LOOP as that gargoyle of cyclical imagination in
                     computation
                  . Like Lovelace, he sees new
                  possibilities in this corner of machine programming, an escape from the prison of
                  mathematics for the freedom afforded by poetry; the capacity of a program to LOOP
                  infinitely functions as analog to the human ability to think outside the bounds of
                  known reality. Between the equations of Note G are
                  the hidden realities that a scientist-poet seeks to discover.
                  Just as Lovelace’s virtual design taught Babbage something new about his
                  invention, the machine can discover new understandings of
                  mathematics: the relations and the nature of many subjects in
                     that science are necessarily thrown into new lights, and more profoundly
                     investigated, leading to collateral
                     influences (Note G). This is a far cry
                  from merely making available what is already known. The
                  performing object guides the inspired mind; as Roger Whitson suggests, Lovelace
                  imparts an agency to mathematics itself
                  ; she welcomes the machine as a fellow
                  collaborator in their discovery.
               While the Engine was designed for a clerical function, sometimes when it is
                  personified by Lovelace and Babbage, it comes off as more. Lovelace, for instance,
                  writes to Babbage on March 24, 1839, Surely the machine
                     allows you a holiday sometimes. The Notes
                  may have been her child, but the machine takes on a life of
                  its own, and some of that imagined subjectivity is due the Engine’s capacity for
                  remembering past processes and reacting to the new variables it produces. Lovelace
                  in a footnote explains that the Engine anticipates what it needs beyond
                  instruction: The engine is capable, under certain
                     circumstances, of feeling about to discover which of two
                     or more possible contingencies has occurred, and of then shaping its future
                     course accordingly. Babbage himself imagined that he was teaching the Engine to foresee and then act upon that
                     foresight
                  . It is not the programmer but the Variable Cards who furnish the mill
                     with its proper food (Note B), not the
                  mathematician but the Combinatorial Cards who reshape
                     its future course. It is a design that echoes the
                  way Turing imagines the possibility of real machine intelligence: When computers
                  are not programmed with explicit instructions on how to behave in given
                  circumstances, but instead are taught in some fashion . This is not unlike how we think about
                  the automated tools available today in the digital humanities, as that which we
                  teach to become guides that we trust too readily, and credit too rarely. At the
                  very least, the Engine, like Lovelace, contributes beyond its clerical position.
                  Though Lovelace’s Objection looms large in computer
                  history, her Notes trouble its message again and
                  again; the Engine does what it is ordered to perform, but it also
                     feels and discovers the
                     possible.
               
            
         

            Conclusion
            More than a century later, Turing stood on a similar precipice as Babbage. His
               improvement on the design Lovelace left for history was the notion that subprograms
               could be added to rewrite others and themselves — that programs could be programmers,
               too. His view was a future where it is the masters who are
                  liable to get replaced rather than the servants, and that the future of software would be the eventual transfer
               of authority from the human to a program stored in the machine. These realizations
               coincide with the invention of the ENIAC, the first electronic computer and a computer of the Babbage type (Neumann, qtd.by ). In 1945, an ENIAC subprogram called the
                  master programmer — a different kind of
                  thinking guidance system — sent change orders to the human
               computers. This new labor structure persisted with the digital turn; as Chun
               explains, there remains a sense that we are slaves, rather than
                  masters, clerks rather than managers — that, because ‘code is law,’ the code,
                  rather than the programmer, rules
               . For Chun, code as law flips
               the command structures of human and machine; it establishes a
                  perpetual oscillation between the two positions
               . Anne Balsamo expands this role reversal more
               broadly, to the doubled nature of technology: as determining and
                  determined, as both autonomous and subservient to human goals
               . And Hayles argues that the human and the
               machine are neither mutually exclusive nor overlapping subject positions; instead,
               subjectivity is generated by a feedback loop between the two states . I argue that this feedback loop was there
               from the beginning, embedded within Lovelace’s 1843 Notes. Though born of a desire for an ideal clerk, the thinking
                  machine shares with its fellow peculiar support
               figures a tendency to think beyond (with and for) the inspired minds who imagine them
               as servile.
            J. Chuan Chu, one of the hardware engineers for the ENIAC, called software […] the daughter of Frankenstein — hardware’s
               feminine counterpart (). If hardware was
               Frankenstein’s creature, software is an Eve born of Adam’s hardware rib. The metaphor
               mirrors the relationship between Babbage and Lovelace, too; he, the man with a
               machine in his mind, and she who came later, the only person who communicated with
               that machine directly. Shelley, who in the novel Frankenstein reduced the Enlightenment-educated man to the servant of his
               hardware creation, had Dr. Frankenstein destroy his daughter. But computing history
               tells a different story. Software replaces the man. Though the modern computer was
               not influenced by Lovelace’s writing, it was a striking case of
                  design convergence
               . According to Fuegi and Francis,
                  Howard Aiken referenced Babbage’s designs in 1937 while working on the electric
                  calculator for IBM, and Konrad Zuse encountered Babbage’s designs the same year
                     . Actual software would not be theorized
                  until Turing or fully realized until the Manchester Baby in 1948. Software
               eventually inherited the same structures of co-authorship which Lovelace embodied and
               described. Building on the secretarial workforce at the end of the nineteenth
               century, itself built on the clerical labor of the previous century, women would make
               up the bulk of computing labor. Lovelace begot the Wrens and the so-called ENIAC girls, the brawn to the corporate
                  brain of twentieth-century computing innovation. Even after
               WWII, this idea of female clerical labor was so fundamental to the structure of the
               industry that IBM measured production by girl hours not
                  man hours
               . The labor organization that Chun
                  describes at Bletchley Park persisted until the invention of automatic computer
                  programming allowed coders to communicate with these new subprograms instead of
                  the machine directly. Ironically, this sparked fear that the
                     manly practice of coding was becoming de-skilled. Instead
                  of suffering through machine language like a real man,
                  shortcuts allowed programmers to write without knowing how the subroutines worked
                     . The development of such languages ended
                  up displacing mostly female computers and ushering in a male-dominated era of
                  computer science. Chun points out that the very anxieties around feminized
                  software have, more recently, paradoxically led to the
                     romanticization and recuperation of early female operators of the 1946
                     Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer (ENIAC) as the first programmers,
                     for they, unlike us, had intimate contact with and knowledge of the
                     machine
                  . Goldstine and Neumann, whose work
               on the ENIAC essentially coined the verb to program,
               defined computing as a relationship between scientists, who posit algorithms, and
               female programmers, who inscribe them. Software replaced this structure with one just
               like it: subroutines that are both automatic and authoritative, both mindless and
               full of high-level abstraction, as it was embodied in the first computer programmer
               and her virtual object of desire.
         
