Title:  Facets of Friction: Investigating
                    epistemological friction between computing and the humanities to support Digital
                    Humanities computing education
Volume:  020
Issue:  1
Date:  20 February 2026
Abstract:  
                
                Learning computing can often be challenging to Digital Humanities (DH) students
                    because its knowledge-production practices and values do not necessarily align
                    with those of humanistic inquiry. Further, the breadth of the technologies used
                    in the field can make it difficult to identify which computational ideas and
                    skills are most essential to teach in DH. This paper argues that, in order to
                    teach students to enact a paradigm of 'humanistic computing' which is reflective
                    of humanistic interests and ways of knowing, it is necessary to centre the
                    epistemological friction that exists between computing and the humanities. It
                    proposes a four-faceted framework to aid in the identification and exploration
                    of that friction, with the intention that it be used by DH educators to
                    structure their computing curriculum – regardless of the technologies or level
                    of abstraction it engages with – and by students or even practitioners to
                    scaffold a critical approach to computational DH work.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                Computing can be understood as the mapping of human conceptions of structure and
                    process to machine interpretable ones. Computing education pioneer Alan Perlis
                    asserted that the aim of any computing course should be to reveal [...] how
                    analysis of some intuitively performed human tasks leads to mechanical
                    algorithms accomplishable by a machine . Learning
                    computing is a question of interrogating this process of translation. 
                When translating between natural languages, the best translation is not one which
                    preserves exact vocabulary, but rather one which preserves tone and intention.
                    Rendering such a translation depends on understanding the structures that govern
                    the languages involved, which are a reflection of the way in which the cultures
                    from which they emerged view and makes sense of the world . This
                    remains true with respect to the translation of structure and process.
                As C.P Snow argued, academic disciplines are cultures . Karin Knorr
                    Cetina (1999) adds a level of precision to Snow’s definition in describing
                    academic fields specifically as epistemic cultures, naming epistemology as the
                    defining factor . Epistemology is concerned with how we know what
                    we know and why we believe it. Domain cultures are characterised by what types
                    of knowledge and ways of knowing a domain considers important and legitimate. A
                    domain’s epistemic machinery is the specific set of methodologies and tools used
                    for knowledge creation and validation; they are a concrete manifestation of its
                    epistemology.
                Natural language translation becomes more complex as a function of the cultural
                    distance between languages. Translating between French and Italian, for
                    instance, is fairly straightforward. They emerged from cultures with similar
                    values and ways of understanding the world. This is reflected in the similar
                    structure of their languages, making it relatively simple to find equivalencies.
                    Now consider a translation between French and languages such as Diné (Navajo),
                    in which the level of animacy of agents — understood according to a continuum
                    which reflects indigenous beliefs — impacts many structural elements 
                    ; or Yolmo, a Peruvian language with evidentiality, meaning that the way a
                    speaker knows things must be encoded in the grammar : in these
                    cases, ideas and information are much more likely to be lost or altered in
                    translation. Similarly, computing and humanistic disciplines are more culturally
                    — epistemologically — different than, say, computing and mathematics. This
                    distance is a central challenge of computing in the Digital Humanities (DH).
                DH comprises the the thoughtful use of computing in humanistic inquiry and the
                    thinking through of computing from the perspective of the traditions of the
                        humanities Definition from Geoffrey Rockwell, selected from a list of
                        crowdsourced definitions collected as part of annual Day of DH events:
                            https://github.com/hepplerj/whatisdigitalhumanities/blob/master/dayofquotes_full.csv
                     Some might describe it as trying to use computers to tackle
                    non-computational problems. However, there is nothing inherent to the problems
                    that makes them non-computational; rather, it is that the priorities and
                    interests of humanities inquiry are different from those of the scientific
                    culture from which computing emerged and which its associated tools and
                    procedures correspondingly embody . Consequently, doing computing
                    in a way that preserves humanistic outlooks and values requires attention to be
                    explicitly paid to points of epistemological friction.
                If the broad aim of computing education is to gain an understanding of the
                    translation process, then DH-specific computing education should centre the
                    interrogation of epistemological friction. In support of this aim, this paper
                    proposes a framework for describing and modelling friction between computing and
                    the humanities. This work is subject to two simplifying assumptions. First,
                    though it is evidently not the case, the humanities are treated as a homogeneous
                    entity, and one which includes disciplines such as history which could also be
                    classified as social sciences. Second, computing, in the abstract, is associated
                    with computer science and its corresponding knowledge culture, as this is how it
                    is situated both in the majority of educational institutions as well as, to draw
                    a broad generalisation, in the consciousness of the lay public.
                The framework comprises four facets of epistemological friction:
                
                    Negative Knowledge: This facet looks at what
                        disciplines choose to know, can not know, and the errors they make in
                        knowing, exploring how these elements are viewed and incorporated into
                        knowledge production practices.
                    Positionality and Context: A domain’s epistemology is
                        inextricably linked to its conception of the agency of knowledge creator(s)
                        and the influence of perspective. This second facet grapples with the
                        dissonance between detached scientific knowledge and situated humanistic
                        knowledge, and interrogates how computational techniques both resist and can
                        be made compatible with uniqueness, plurality, ambiguity, and nuance.
                    Relationship to Tools: Technology can be understood
                        as impartial and a means of circumventing human bias or as a product and
                        reflection of human culture and values. The third facet explores these
                        different conceptions and how they translate to the use of technology in
                        knowledge production, with particular attention to notions of objectivity
                        and independence, and a tool’s capacity to (intentionally or
                        unintentionally) influence and alter work.
                    Hermeneutic Attention: The final facet considers the
                        tension between a scholarly tradition whose procedures aim to eliminate the
                        need for interpretation and one to which it is central.
                
                The framework is principally intended for use by DH computing instructors and
                    students — to guide the development of curriculum and scaffold critical
                    practice. An instructor looking to introduce databases might choose to structure
                    their lesson around Positionality and Context and Negative Knowledge, having
                    their students create schemata grounded in specific perspectives and analyse
                    what is highlighted and lost in each. A student applying a text analysis tool
                    might be encouraged, through use of the facets as framework for analysis, to
                    question the extent to which their intentions match up with the structural and
                    procedural logics imposed by the computational medium (Relationship to Tools);
                    the use of the facets as a reflection tool when creating a visualisation might
                    also lead a student to more explicitly incorporate a representation of their
                    process of interpretation into the digital product (Hermeneutic Attention).
                The facets are not expected to be comprehensive but highlight common sites of
                    friction which may play into a variety of DH projects. More importantly, they
                    illustrate the concept of epistemological friction in the abstract, such that
                    individuals might extend and adapt the framework to their own contexts.
            

                Negative Knowledge
                Artist Mimi Onuoha has a filing cabinet. Several, in fact — an oddity in the age
                    of increasingly digital paperwork. But the increasing digital-ness of society is
                    precisely why they exist. Onuoha’s cabinets are full of folders with labels such
                    as ‘People excluded from public housing because of criminal records,’ ‘White
                    children adopted by POC’ and ‘Quantifiable effect of corruption in lean
                    economies.’ Every single one is empty. Onuoha calls her collection the Library
                    of Missing Datasets; the folders represent collections of data that do not exist
                    — because those with the resources to create them lack the incentive, because
                    the subjects do not lend themselves to favoured modes of data collection,
                    because the work collection would require outweighs the perceived benefit, or
                    because there are advantages to non-existence.
                        https://github.com/MimiOnuoha/missing-datasets
                     Ohunua’s artistic practice turns on what is forgotten when globalised,
                    quantified societies require the fluid messiness of people to be made into
                    legible forms of data; she asserts that What is missing is still there. This
                    is where my work begins.
                        https://mimionuoha.com/about
                
                Karin Knorr Cetina coined the term Negative Knowledge to designate not
                    nonknowledge but rather knowledge of the limits of knowing, of the mistakes
                    we make in trying to know, of the things that interfere with our knowing, of
                    what we are not interested in and do not want to know  We
                    might consider the core question of epistemology to be How and why do we know
                    what we know? but consideration of the inverse — the photo negative — equally
                    stands to outline the characteristics of a given epistemic approach. Different
                    domains opt, to varying degrees, to disregard specific knowledge so as to enable
                    the creation of strong knowledge claims and ontologies of what is knowable, or
                    to leverage missingness and ambiguity to generate avenues of exploration.
                    Onuoha’s work specifically points to the negative as a notable friction point
                    when it comes to the intersection of computers and humanity.
                 
                
                    What we choose not to know
                    A folder labelled Nuanced racial descriptions of American residents — 1890
                        would have fit right in in the Library of Missing Datasets. The 1890
                        American census is noteworthy in that it saw the introduction of Herman
                        Hollerith’s tabulating machine — considered a direct ancestor of the modern
                        computer. After being collected by surveyors, data was transferred to punch
                        cards to be tabulated automatically. This new scheme required that all
                        answers be discrete, or made to be so. Race 'Ethnicity' would be the
                            term used today to describe many of the options, but 'race' is the term
                            that was used in the census. was one of the characteristics
                        encoded on the punch cards, and the 1890 census introduced several new
                        options. The questionnaire was the first to include Japanese, (previously
                        there had been no distinction between East-Asian countries) and Indian
                        (first nations). Where, since 1850, only the categories Black and
                        Mulatto (any person of mixed race) had been included, the rise of the
                        eugenics movement drove congress to mandate the introduction of additional
                        categories based on blood quantum. The instructions given to the enumerators
                        explained that an individual having 3/4 or more black blood should be
                        labelled as Black, 3/8-5/8 as Mulatto, 1/4 as Quadroon and 1/8 or less
                        as Octoroon . It is not clear the extent to which the precision
                        of the categories was government dictated or a product of the need for clean
                        delineations, but we can be more sure of two things: First, that the
                        transfer of data to punchcards served to erase the presence of any
                        uncertainty or ambiguity that might have been noted by surveyors; and,
                        second, that the tabulating machine facilitated the imposition and
                        propagation of seemingly strict racial categories — highly contextual
                        political constructions reified by the machine — creating data that would be
                        the foundation of government policies that would continually re-inscribe
                        them.
                    What we choose not to know in computing is principally a question of
                        encoding. The power of computing lies in the ability to manipulate
                        information at a scale and speed beyond human capability. Prerequisite to
                        this is an underlying model which operates at some level of abstraction —
                        necessary to accommodate volume. The process of creating a
                        reduced-complexity rendering of a real-world phenomenon is inherently lossy,
                        a noted limitation to the correctness of computers . The
                        challenge this presents is exacerbated in a humanities context as the
                        humanities historically have adopted methodologies that are less amenable to
                        abstract generalization than those used by the sciences; they belong to a
                        tradition of telling detail as opposed to seeking generalizations
                        . Further, the computational form accepts only that which can
                        be told explicitly and precisely , a requirement which
                        drives the choice of what to know. Correspondingly, the knowledge
                        prioritised by the disciplines can be antipodal, the very specificity or
                        variation which would make something an interesting object of study in the
                        humanistic tradition  incompatible with normalisation. The
                        strict encoding required by Hollerith’s machine — and, indeed, by modern
                        computers — allowed for faster and larger-scale processing; the 1890 census
                        received 25% more responses than the one in 1880 but was tabulated three and
                        a half times faster. At the same time, it made negative context and
                        ambiguity, and, correspondingly, not all the changes it encouraged, if not
                        imposed, proved productive. The fine grained African-American racial
                        classifications introduced in 1890 were removed before the 1900 census,
                        after census officials judged the data of little value and misleading
                        . Echoes of similar encodings, however, continue to
                        persist — independently of the knowledge they made negative. In their
                        investigation of contemporary datasets used for image recognition, for
                        instance, Scheuerman et al. found that the racial categories used in the
                        Microsoft Celeb database were Caucasian, Mongoloid, and Negroid
                        . They wonder at the contrast of the use of these terms,
                        which are evidently sociohistorical, and the fact that, in modern practice,
                        classifications of race [...] are portrayed as insignificant, indisputable,
                        and apolitical.
                    Faults identified in the use of such large Machine Learning (ML) datasets are
                        often also a product of Negative Knowledge. ML models rely on the ample,
                        working under the assumption that with enough volume comes generalisability.
                        This is amusing when a model ends up relying on human fingers to identify
                        fish because they are principally represented in the training data being
                        held up by triumphant fishermen , but distinctly more
                        troubling when the widespread absence of racially diverse facial data
                         means that proctoring software exhibits significant bias
                        against students with darker skin tones . danah boyd and
                        Michael Golebiewski’s notion of data voids further illustrates, on a
                        structural level, how computational infrastructure is not designed to
                        account for absence — as demonstrated by the fact that its negative spaces
                        are its weakness. Data voids, as they define them, are places where search
                        queries yielding few results leave space for exploitation by media
                        manipulators with ideological, economic, or political agenda
                        . These vulnerabilities exist because of an
                        assumption baked into the design of search engines: that for any given
                        query, there exists some relevant content .
                        With ample data but no true understanding of content; these systems can only
                        ever return what has been said, glossing over the nuance of novel queries.
                        It is a question of volume, never of interpretation. This foundation in
                        generalisation and macro-level aggregation characteristic of computing is
                        not in and of itself problematic or even undesirable, but it can nonetheless
                        create vulnerabilities whose severity is exacerbated by the fact that they
                        may be less expected and accounted for than attacks such as DOS, which are
                        also grounded in the computational facility for — and prioritisation of —
                        scale. Somewhat ironically, the very principles which created the data voids
                        are those that allow them to do damage. As attackers fill in identified gaps
                        with targeted material, the increased volume of content causes it to
                        proliferate widely and quickly. boyd and Golebiewski highlight that there is
                        no fix for data voids; rather, it is a question of awareness — of their
                        existence, of the circumstances of their creation, and of the potential
                        consequences and how they might be mitigated.
                    A Humanistic data practice, as described by Ryan Cordell (2019), should be
                        one that seeks primarily to point our attention to the gaps in our
                        digitization and critical practices . Cordell comes from the
                        world of literary history; in this context, in addition to a more pronounced
                        materiality, which stands to reify absence, there is a methodological
                        tradition of archiving which foregrounds questions of provenance and
                        politics of preservation undergirding phenomena such as canon formation. He
                        insists that humanists must not lose sight of these perspectives when it
                        comes to computational work, asserting that a humanistic approach must
                        begin with discussions of data construction rather than data analysis.
                        Attention to Negative Knowledge in DH relates not only to the critical
                        interrogation of knowledge made negative by the use of computers, but also
                        the ways in which the use of computers can bring to light knowledge made
                        negative by the same human factors Onuoha describes with respect to
                        digitisation — which, for all it presents unique challenges, is also simply
                        another way of creating and preserving information that traces a specific
                        narrative.
                    Cultural critic Walter Benjamin’s conception of aura could be considered a
                        type of Negative Knowledge. He argues that the aura of a piece of art, its
                        presence in time and space, its unique existence at the place where it
                        happens to be, could never be captured by mechanical reproduction
                         — mechanical reproduction notably requiring similar
                        decontextualisation and normalisation to computational transformation. Bruno
                        Latour and Adam Lowe, to the contrary, argue that the aura of a work is not
                        eroded but rather extended and enriched by its facsimiles .
                        The myriad reproductions together form an assemblage: a collection of
                        sources that, though each analysable in isolation, when considered in
                        conjunction with one another have irreducible properties [...] that emerge
                        from the interactions between parts ( Each component part
                        of the assemblage has its own trajectory — story of how it moved through the
                        world — and, though together they do not form a seamless whole, their
                        conjunction and interaction is generative, continually adding to the aura.
                        What distinguishes digital texts and, more broadly, digital collections,
                        from their analog equivalents is their massive addressability. They are
                        flexibly interrogable from myriad angles and levels of granularity, which
                        facilitates linking . Further, there is a flattening of
                        hierarchies born of the equal accessibility of higher- and lower- level
                        components;  argues, for instance, that a defining
                        characteristics of databases as a New Media form is the way in which they
                        invert the relationship between syntagm and the paradigm.
                        They materialize the myriad possibilities (paradigms) represented by an
                        individual row, diminishing the dominance of an isolated linear syntagm. A
                        digital collection, with its emphasis on individual trajectories and
                        linking, could correspondingly be understood as an assemblage; for all that
                        computational tools can make negative some knowledge — just as mechanical
                        reproduction did, especially with respect to uniqueness — the kinds of
                        multi-level and combinatoric interrogations they permit can help expose and
                        explore different sites of missingess.
                    In a name-based search of the Papers of Thomas Jefferson Digital Edition — a
                        digital collection of a significant portion of the man’s correspondence —
                        Lauren Klein found no results for James Hemings, despite the central role
                        the enslaved man played in Jefferson’s diplomatic dealings in his capacity
                        as household chef . A global search turns up a single
                        first-name mention, identifiable as Hemings only through a researcher’s
                        metadata note. This archive and its silences are a product of historical
                        power dynamics; the documents preserved may in rare cases be written about
                        marginalised populations, but are even more seldom written by them. Any
                        effort to recover these silences using its documents or others subject to
                        the same politics of creation and conservation (e.g. ledger books, sales
                        receipts) risks reinforcing the damaging notion that African American
                        voices from before emancipation — not just in the archival record, but the
                        voices themselves — are silent, and irretrievably lost .
                        Modern humanities scholars have moved away from trying to fill archival
                        silences to instead explicitly highlighting them in a way that invites
                        critical speculation about the past; the shift is to a conceptual model that
                        works by illumination rather than demystification and, through
                        explication rather than appropriation or empowerment .
                        Klein demonstrates how digital techniques can be turned to this task. Using
                        named entity recognition and co-reference extraction to derive relationships
                        from letter contents, Klein created a deformation of the archive that
                        disrupts the structures of power it inscribes: Rather than privilege the
                        relationships between letter writers, I sought to dismantle the letter as
                        the unit of the archive, examining each word of content on equal plane
                        . Unlike the links drawn in a visualisation of the
                        correspondence network of the starting archive, the arcs that link
                        Jefferson to the men and women he enslaved in an interaction network
                        visualisation Klein created from her new version of the data are much more
                        prominent than those that link him to his family members and friends. This,
                        she asserts, conjures a sense of the dependence, on the part of Jefferson,
                        on the men and women he enslaved, even as it cannot recreate what these
                        people said in their conversations, where they went in order to conduct
                        their transactions, and how they truly lived their everyday lives .
                    Closing the circle, the massive addressability of digital objects can be used
                        in service of inquiry which explicitly focuses on absence. For Deb
                        Verhoeven, the absence in question is that of women in creative roles in the
                        film industry. Verhoeven and her team use speculative network analysis to
                        re-imagine film industry DEI policies, the premise being that network
                        analysis puts emphasis on relationships instead of individuals 
                         and is correspondingly suited to targeting systemic inequalities.
                        They do not look purely at what is there, but at what is not but could be,
                        adding nodes and vertices representing hypothetical diverse creatives and
                        their relationships to existing collaboration networks and analysing how
                        these changes impact the health of the network by comparing its overall
                        metrics to those of notably more equitable regional networks.
                    Foundationally humanistic work like Klein and Verhoeven’s is not possible
                        without the high-level manipulation and rapid calculation made possible by
                        computation. Its use, however, requires a specific type of problem modelling
                        — one whose focus on abstraction and generalisation can butt up against the
                        humanities interest in nuance and specificity. This is a tension which must
                        be recognised and navigated in DH work.
                
                
                    What can not be known
                    Every area of knowledge production deals with uncertainty. Potter et al.
                        divide it into two high-level types. The first is Aleatoric uncertainty,
                        which they define as random uncertainty inherent to the problem. Negative
                        Knowledge is more closely tied to the second type, Epistemic uncertainty,
                        which designates things which could, in principle, be known, but in
                        practice are not; this type of uncertainty is introduced through deficient
                        measurements, poor models, or missing data . Disciplines
                        develop their own distinct ways of representing and accounting for
                        uncertainty, which, being derived from domain scenarios, are a product of
                        their own epistemic standpoints. Given the differences in how knowledge
                        creation and validation functions between disciplines, these techniques and
                        standards can not necessarily be ported from one context to another.
                    The scholars of Project Cornelia encountered this challenge with respect to
                        their data modelling relationship networks of seventeenth century Flemish
                        painters . Art history has a record of using best-guess
                        imputation to fill data gaps, with individual scholars proposing possible
                        values based on available related sources. Founded as they are in insights
                        gained from literature, expertise, gut feeling, and common sense, such
                        imputations are often imprecise and divergent ; they
                        do not possess the necessary conditions for replication, which is frequently
                        associated with knowledge validation in computing. The Cornelia team assert
                        that while art history’s traditional ad hoc strategies and methods to
                        tackle missing data can certainly be used to a certain extent to address
                        qualitative and micro-historical questions, they fall short of meeting our
                        data-driven research agenda ; they instead turned to
                        statistical imputation. Single imputation, they discovered, even when run on
                        processed data subsets intended to be favourable to the technique through
                        constructed homogeneity, increased rather than reduced the level of
                        uncertainty in the data set . The difficulty of
                        imputation in cases like Project Cornelia’s is that even small variances can
                        drastically alter the meaning of the data. Brosens et al. give the example
                        of the missing birthdate of artist Antoon Salert; depending on whether he
                        entered the network in 1579 or in 1590 — both values generated by variations
                        of single imputation underwritten by different mathematical functions — he
                        might have been considered a contemporary of renown painter Peter Paul
                        Rubens or as belonging to the first generation of painters following in
                        Ruben’s footsteps. The researchers’ next recourse was to attempt the more
                        complex technique of multiple imputation, teaming up with biostatisticians
                        in whose work the technique is commonly used. Multiple imputation, as the
                        name suggests, utilises single imputation across multiple datasets to
                        produce a mean value that is statistically valid. They found that the
                        idiosyncratic nature of the Cornelia data and the high levels of
                        missingness made even the results of this more robust technique varyingly
                        useful.
                    Rebecca Sutton Koeser and Zoe LeBlanc describe this complicating factor of
                        prevalent missingness as a phenomenon that is endemic to humanistic
                        scholarship . In light of this inescapable characteristic of
                        humanistic contexts, and in the knowledge that, as Enjoli alludes to,
                        archival silences are magnified in digitization projects, they propose
                        that DH could adopt a practice of speculative reading that moves the
                        margins of our analyses to the center, framing missingness as something
                        that we can consider as an object of study outright. The analyses they
                        undertook in this line of inquiry did not look dramatically different from
                        those of the Cornelia team; Koeser and LeBlanc used statistical methods,
                        emerged from scientific and mathematical disciplines to make guesses about
                        lacunae in humanistic datasets — in their specific case, the membership and
                        borrowing records of Paris bookshop and library Shakespeare and Company.
                        They are conscious, in their work, to maintain methodological ties to the
                        humanistic, always contextualising as a means of understanding the efficacy
                        and limits of their work. In their attempt to use forecasting methods
                        typically employed in finance to estimate missing borrowing activity, they
                        identified that the predicted bottom line, which seems high relative to
                        subscriptions, could potentially be explained by the bookstore owner’s
                        propensity — as ascertained through additional documents — for granting but
                        not documenting free subscriptions. Koeser and LeBlanc also experimented
                        with the application of techniques used by ecologists to correct for bias
                        originating from the exclusion of species that are difficult to observe to
                        the problem of missing books, but acknowledge that, for all there have been
                        parallels drawn between cultural and ecological diversity, there are
                        assumptions in the unseen species model that are not analogous to their
                        problem — notably the rate of change in the system and the probable
                        frequency difference between a book, which they point out could quite
                        reasonably be borrowed only once, and a species for which multiple sightings
                        are expected. Another of their experiments, a recommender-system inspired
                        model aiming to predict possible borrowing history during a period of
                        missing records, turned out to be quite accurate, the author’s personal
                        correspondence confirming a number of its suggestions for Ernest
                        Hemingway.
                    Even when, as is the case with the Hemingway predictions, their results were
                        proven correct, Koeser and LeBlanc emphasise that correctness, or even the
                        results, are not the point. In the practice of speculative reading, the
                        models are intended to provide a means to experiment in knowledge
                        creation. They propose that missingness should not be considered merely a
                        technical category for measurement but rather positioned as a conceptual
                        framework for considering data. They align themselves with the Uncertain
                        Archive Project’s aim of carv[ing] out an epistemic space for modes of
                        inquiry that are motivated less by providing answers than by posing
                        questions, exploring uncertainties, and offering material and speculative
                        approaches . Under this paradigm, missingness is not
                        something bothersome to be accounted for, but something to be used
                        generatively.
                
                
                    Errors in knowing
                    Scientific knowledge production and validation are strongly rooted in a logic
                        of trial and error. There is an expectation of potential sources of error
                        being reported and, through replication, discounted. Some argue that, by
                        virtue of its disciplinary heritage, replication ought to be incorporated
                        into the scholarship of DH ; however, as with
                        uncertainty, the portability of epistemic practices merits
                        consideration.
                    In his 2022 study intended as a replication of Langer et al.’s finding that
                        the frequency and diversity of biological taxa [in fiction] have been
                        declining steadily since the first half of the nineteenth century, DH
                        scholar Andrew Piper’s primary conclusion was that he disagreed with the way
                        in which the authors of the initial paper defined fiction in the first
                        place . One part of Piper’s study comprised what we might call
                        a traditional replication — testing the initial methods on the same data.
                        In this particular case, however, though also drawn from Project Gutenberg,
                        Piper’s data differed somewhat from Langer et al.’s. Though he reports
                        applying the filtering criteria specified in the original paper, Piper’s
                        search yielded only 13,075 texts, as compared with the original 15,238. In
                        running his approximation of their dictionary-based biological term instance
                        identification model on this corpus, Piper found routine discrepancies of
                        ten to fifteen years with regard to inflection points and, when he ran the
                        experiment on a subset of the data constructed using a different means of
                        identifying fiction, he observed the opposite of Langer’s reported trend.
                        Piper also undertook a conceptual replication ,
                        introducing an additional ML-based model and two additional datasets to
                        investigate the result in question. These produced further contradictory
                        trends. For Piper, these results cannot be understood as disproving the
                        initial result; he asserts that they are, rather, a starting point of
                        alternative interpretations of the subject matter and, more abstractly, a
                        case to drive discussion of methodological questions in cultural
                        analytics.
                    In her historical examination of the notion of learning from errors in
                        science, Jutta Schickore describes two distinct types of error-related
                        practices: arguments from error and enquiries into error. The former
                        consists of those methodological arguments that the practitioners put
                        forward to indicate that their research took the potential sources of error
                        into account ; conventions such as error bars and the
                        practice of direct replication fall into this category. Piper’s exploration,
                        in particular the conceptual replication, aligns more closely with the
                        latter type, where errors are not merely uncovered to be cast aside but,
                        rather, become the object of systematic exploration and discourse
                        . This outlook is echoed by DH literary scholars Hoyt
                        Long and Richard So with respect to their work using machine leaning to
                        explore the evolution of the Haiku as a distinct poetic form .
                        They explicitly leveraged errors, in the understanding that they occurred at
                        points of class overlap, asserting that what the machine learning
                        literature treats as misclassifications [...] we treat as opportunities for
                        interpretation .
                    Negative knowledge, when it comes to computing, is often a product of
                        formalisation — whether it be the strict encoding of datafication or the
                        normalisation of messy and lacunar data required by model building. An
                        epistemologically-aware approach allows for this formalisation to move
                        beyond being simply a necessary and straightforward condition for
                        computation to become a rich and productive concept to think about
                        computation, the humanities, and their encounters .
                        Negative knowledge, can be a tool to generate discourse  — an
                        awareness of what is not there providing a new lens for investigating what
                        is. In their theorization of Humanistic HCI, Shaowen and Jeffrey Bardzell,
                        propose speculative design futuring as an emblematic practice; they
                        specifically tie this exercise of interpretively explor[ing] alternate
                        worlds, to discover the possible and the preferable in them, and to
                        construct both pathways and the collective will to pursue them 
                         to the notion of emancipation, which they assert is a fundamental
                        aim of humanistic knowledge production. For all that computational tools and
                        methodologies can be the instigators of oppression, they can — with an
                        awareness of Negative Knowledge — equally be used to foster and facilitate
                        imagining otherwise.
                
            

                Positionality and Context
                On July 11th 2021, Maxime Bernier, the leader of the People’s Party of Canada tweeted
                        https://x.com/MaximeBernier/status/1414302864672006146
                    :
                There are no feminist math, indigenous math, black math, or any other kind of
                    math.
                There is only mathematics. 
                Only physics. 
                Only astronomy. 
                He was quickly met with a rebuttal from mathematician, educator, and researcher
                    Michole Enjoli, in a thread
                        https://x.com/mathchole/status/1414653170232532999
                     beginning:
                Whew. I've been waiting for this one. 
                *cracks knuckles*
                WHERE and WHO we get mathematical knowledge from, shapes the content of the math
                    being taught.
                Enjoli asserts that The belief system of a society motivates which math is
                    taught, pointing to the work of Education scholar Gloria Ladson-Billings who
                    argues that the values being promoted in the U.S. system echo those of the
                    dominant White culture which demands efficiency, consensus, abstraction, and
                    rationality . She further highlights the work of
                    mathematics education scholar , who argues that the kinds of
                    mathematics emphasised by the current U.S. system are a reflection of the value
                    it places on economics: …If we lived in a society with a different set of
                    values, concludes Enjoli, then our mathematics and the education system along
                    with it would again look different and be used differently.
                The reaction to Enjoli’s response testified to the fact that it was a complete
                    novelty to many who, though they disagree with Bernier’s far-right politics,
                    initially found themselves nodding along in recognition of his statement.
                Knowledge validation in science rests on uniformity and replicability. This
                    implies a certain separation of the methods and procedures from the people who
                    perform them and the circumstances in which they are undertaken. Though there is
                    interpretation of results that pushes knowledge forward, the knowledge is 'held'
                    in the resulting detached axioms. This severing of knowledge from creator and
                    context is what makes it easier for a specific cultural construction of Math to
                    be viewed as 'just Math.'
                Humanistic knowledge production, to the contrary, is not looking to achieve
                    consensus in findings, but to create a dialogue between them. This entails a
                    focus on individual nuance and specificity, which is tied up in context of
                    creation. Further, critical interpretation is the core of its knowledge
                    creation; correspondingly, validity is born of acknowledging and incorporating
                    the influence of the creator and their positionality into its epistemic
                    practices rather than designing them to remove it. As DH scholar Harvey Quamen
                    describes, charges of anthropocentrism or ethnocentrism can often be read,
                    especially by scientists, as a need for greater objectivity, but in humanistic
                    circles they are more often assertions that the anthropos and the ethnos remain
                    central to scholarly inquiry . These contrasting approaches to
                    positionality and context are an inevitable source of friction in DH work.
                
                    Nowhere and Somewhere
                    The lab is a central space of scientific knowledge production. Objects
                        studied in the lab are necessarily removed from their spatial and temporal
                        contexts, and it is possible to manipulate the usual restrictions that those
                        impose. For example, scientists might simulate conditions to accelerate the
                        growth cycles of bacteria or alter the circadian rhythms of mice. It is also
                        permissible and expected to substitute transformed and partial versions
                         of an object for the whole. Though computing could be
                        said to lack the same flavour of lab culture, the computer itself stands to
                        act as a lab and encourage a parallel detachment; data, as seen, is a
                        partial and decontextualised representation, and processes such as
                        simulations similarly perform artificial and normalised manipulations. Lab
                        procedures are stringently codified in an effort to minimise space for
                        individual influence. As historian of science Theodore Porter describes, [a]
                        highly disciplined discourse helps to produce knowledge independent of the
                        particular people who make it” . Computing, again,
                        emphasises these properties. It enforces a strict encoding and affords
                        quantification, which is a technology of distance .
                        Further, in facilitating high-scale operation, it minimises the impact of
                        individual deviation. Uniformity is rigorous; human bodies and minds are not
                        uniform. They become more so, however, when viewed from a distance, which is
                        to say their specificity, as either the observer or the observed, is
                        abstracted away.
                    These kinds of realist models of knowledge, asserts Johanna Drucker,
                        depend above all upon an idea that phenomena are observer-independent.The
                        aim is to take a view from nowhere, the implication being that the act of
                        observation — its context and the particular standpoint of the observer —
                        should not have an impact on the phenomenon. This detachment is constructed
                        through standards and procedures. However, [r]endering observation [...] as
                        if it were the same as the phenomena observed collapses the critical
                        distance between the phenomenal world and its interpretation, which
                        und[oes] the basis of interpretation on which humanistic knowledge
                        production is based . Feminist standpoint theory contends
                        that all knowledge is inherently positional, dependent on individual
                        identities and structural power dynamics. As a counterpoint to scientific
                        objectivity, Donna Harraway offers Feminist objectivity, which means quite
                        simply situated knowledges . This outlook is
                        emphatically not an effort to account for every possible perspective — in
                        the way that its counterpart looks to eliminate them all — but a recognition
                        of the existence of the knowledge creator and the incorporation of their
                        positionality and context into praxis. This notion of a view from somewhere
                        is congruent with interpretive — and, correspondingly, humanistic —
                        knowledge production practices.
                    Roopika Risam’s comparative analysis of two visualisations of global
                        migration illustrates how these contrasting understandings can manifest in
                        digital artifacts . The first, The Flow Towards Europe (FTE),
                        was produced by a Finnish startup using a dataset from the United Nations
                        Refugee Agency. It depicts migration towards Europe from African, Middle
                        Eastern, and Asian countries with waves of dots moving in straight lines
                        from source to destination. It is built around a map projection centred on
                        the global North, with a black and turquoise colour scheme that serves to
                        clearly highlight country borders; its authority is drawn from
                        quantification at scale and the use of established conventions. Crossing the
                        Mediterranean Sea by Boat (CMSB), her second example, conversely looks to
                        convince through a focus on individual experience. CMSB is a collection of
                        story maps built around interviews with over 250 migrants. Representations
                        of migration are accompanied by motivations (e.g. escaping sexual
                        violence, escaping civil war) and navigation between migrant stories is
                        based on familial and relational bonds (e.g. brother, young mother),
                        offer[ing] humanizing representations of migrants by placing them within
                        social relations .
                    Each story map includes stops made along the way and integrates the voices of
                        migrants through quotations describing their journeys. Risam highlights that
                        the visualisation does not shy away from assuming a specific position;
                        alongside the visualisations, it directly puts questions to the user such as
                        Unauthorised journeys through Europe are often frayed with dangers, and
                        many have died trying to reach their destinations. Does this change your
                        views on the need to open legal ways for people to travel? and On arrival
                        to their destination, many wait long periods during the asylum process while
                        trying to learn about the rules and regulations in a new country. Can you
                        imagine what it feels like to be waiting in this situation? The crux of her
                        argument, however, is that the choices underlying FTE relating to
                        positionality and context — of the researchers and of the subjects — are no
                        less of an assumed stance than those more plainly legible in CMSB. She
                        argues that the [u]se of a political map absent of topographical features
                        emphasizes national borders and depicts cohesion of the nation state
                        (however fictive) . The choice of the map also creates a
                        focus on the impact of migration on the destinations — some origin points
                        are even out of frame. Risam further points to the fact that the movement of
                        the dots in unimpeded waves serves to emphasiz[e] the magnitude of
                        migration but does not reflect how migration take[s] many more forms than
                        travel from point A to point B [and] does not occur uniformly over time in
                        the flows depicted in the visualisation . In order to
                        produce the uniformity needed to apply the chosen methods, the team behind
                        FTE created departure dates not included in the original dataset and
                        calculated using arrival dates and average human walking speed. They also
                        chose to aggregate the migrants; each dot actually represents a group of 25
                        individuals who were not necessarily travelling together. This decision was
                        notably determined by the limitations of the visualization platform and the
                        creators’ sense that if each migrant were represented by a dot, the
                        visualization would be too crowded and create performance issues .
                    The choices made by the FTE team are a reflection of an epistemic tradition
                        which prioritises generalisability and associates validity with detachment.
                        Computational mechanisms and conventions are instantiations of this
                        position, and therefore in tension with the values of humanistic inquiry,
                        for all that they can be used in service of it when the humanities, too, are
                        interested in large numbers and high-level patterns. Historian of Slavery
                        Jessica Marie Johnson, for instance, argues that while digital resources
                        such as the Trans-Atlantic Slave Database immediately reshaped debates
                        about numbers of women and children exported from the continent, they
                        could not function as a window into the everyday lives of Africans, who
                        remained faceless, anonymous, disembodied . The database
                        reifies the logics of the documents used to construct it — slave ship
                        manifests, colonial censuses, and other European bureaucratic documents —
                        which were the very mechanisms that permitted the slave trade and, as such,
                        reflect colonizer attitudes and values antithetical to those of the
                        researchers looking to use it as a scholarly resource. 
                     encountered a similar mismatch of epistemic priorities
                        in the context of her work on the digital archiving of the Federal Writers’
                        Project Slave Narratives. She highlights how choosing to tag the interview
                        files exclusively by the state in which they were conducted and the surname
                        of the interviewee serves to situate them on a macro-level within the
                        Library of Congress collections but does not at all facilitate more
                        micro-level explorations. These recitations, which give voice to former
                        enslaved persons, have the potential to act as a counterpoint to the
                        coloniser-generated data described by Johnson. However, the fact that even
                        non-unique details of their lives (e.g. family separation, emancipation) and
                        especially the violence committed against them (e.g. corporal punishment,
                        sexual assault) remain untagged severely limits the scope and possibility of
                        digital discoverability and exploitation along these axes. Alexander
                        suggests that the archiving choices are a product of computational
                        conventions, which favour normalisation for abstraction, and provides eight
                        recommendations for the creation of a digital archiving system which
                        consciously choos[es] to center the humanity of [the narratives]
                        ; these include in-depth content tagging anchored in
                        prosopography and the deliberate inclusion of contextual information —
                        additional documents and scholarship relating to cultural and historical
                        context but also information relating to how the data was created (the
                        conduct of the interviews and the project itself). They follow the ethos of
                        contextual digitisation which aims to provide an apparatus by which users
                        can understand the provenance, history, curation and technologies that have
                        served to produce the new intellectual output .
                        Alexander’s recommendations represent a kind of useful mid-way point for DH
                        work.
                    The techniques employed by the Library of Congress and equally by the FTE
                        team are, in part, a means of adapting to scale; they are standard
                        convention in many areas of computing precisely because the power of
                        computation lies in its facility with scale. While a thought-provoking use
                        of affect, the deep context and relationality underpinning the CMSB approach
                        would be infeasible and, arguably, less impactful, using comparable number
                        of records. Alexander’s recommendations strike a balance; they emphasise the
                        inclusion of context and specificity, while also accounting for the
                        higher-level more abstract structures — such as tagging system — whose
                        analytical affordances are the reason that humanists were drawn to the use
                        of computation in the first place.
                
                
                    Reshaping Convention
                    An essential part of the work of DH, as in the case of Alexander’s
                        speculative guidelines, is to (re)imagine and adapt conceptions and
                        practices born of one of its constituent disciplines’ epistemic traditions
                        to align with the other. Drucker takes this back to the most base level with
                        her reframing of ‘data’ to ‘capta’. Data, with its Latin root of ‘given,’
                        implies passivity; data is a natural representation of pre-existing fact
                        Capta, signifying ‘taken,’ conveys the constructedness of a
                        representation, acknowledg[ing] the situated, partial, and constitutive
                        character of knowledge production . 
                    The notion of capta is at the heart of sociologist Maggie Walter’s work on
                        data-driven government policy and Australian indigenous communities. Walter
                        describes the data about indigenous communities resulting from the
                        prevailing paradigm as BADDR — Blaming, Aggregate, Decontextualised,
                        Deficit, and Restrictive . A theoretically neutral and
                        realistically dominant standpoint engenders othering, measuring in terms
                        of deviation from a norm. Aggregation creates and reifies an imaginary
                        homogeneity. Removing context devalues lived experience. Metrics designed in
                        external contexts which do not align with a population’s worldviews, values,
                        and priorities will inevitably find them wanting. [S]tatistics that
                        perpetually describe the problem are themselves part of the problem,
                        reproducing on a seemingly endless repeat the trope of Indigenous deficit,
                        writes Walter; these patterns are elevated and perpetuated by the insistence
                        that data are just data [...] immutable and indisputable. As a
                        counterpoint to typical quantitative models, Walter introduces the idea of
                        nayri kati — good numbers, in the palawa Tasmanian Aboriginal
                        language . Broadly, nayri kati refer to metrics
                        emerging from standpoint-informed methodologies. As one example, she
                        contrasts standard public health data with that collected by the Albuquerque
                        Area Southwest Tribal Epidemiology Centre; the latter’s metrics account for
                        the way in which
                    for Indigenous peoples, health is not just about maintaining physical
                        health, such as through exercise or taking medications to prevent and manage
                        diseases, it is connected to their ways of being and doing that are unique
                        to their identity and understanding of the world [...] for example, a way of
                        life that supports wellness and spirituality and ceremonies, traditional
                        medicine, heritage languages, family and community connectedness,
                        agricultural way of life, and physical wellness .
                    She notes that the introduction of new metrics is not the most important
                        aspect of this kind of intervention, emphasising rather the importance of
                        making visible the contrast and shift in methodology. Walter associates
                        western quantitative methodologies, especially scientific ones, with a lack
                        of epistemological reflexivity stemming from the choice not to engage with
                        standpoint; they have been the norm, and normal gets conflated with
                        natural. These methodologies contain within them the basic tenets of
                        societally dominant ways of knowing, but like a fish in water, most
                        researchers don’t subject these ways of knowing to scrutiny
                        . Computation does rely on the quantitative,
                        which may appear less amenable to situatedness than the qualitative, but
                        Walter demonstrates how quantitative work can be made compatible with
                        positionality.
                    Drucker herself illustrates the data-capta shift — focusing less on
                        collective values and more on questions of perspective and embodied
                        experience — through a series of experimental 'capta' visualisations. In one
                        example she augments a traditional bar chart representing the publication of
                        nineteenth century novels with layered horizontal artifacts so as to
                        communicate the context of their creation — the whole timeline of steps
                        (e.g. writing, acquisition, editing, pre-press work) leading up to the event
                        of publication that had previously been the sole focus of the chart. In
                        another series of visualisations, she explores different ways of warping
                        linear time scales to reflect how time is perceived by the subject whose
                        data is being represented. The latter plays into some of the principles of
                        the emergent movement of affective data visualisation — or visceralisation —
                        which attempts to disrupt and extend the conventions of scientific computing
                        by challenging the binary and hierarchy between reason and emotion,
                        positioning the latter as a component of, rather than a risk to, valid
                        knowledge production. Lauren Klein and Catherine D’Ignazio give the example
                        of two visualisations of United States gun-related violence statistics. The
                        more 'typical' example is a bar chart of the aggregated number of active
                        shooter events per year . The affective approach is an
                        animated chart where arcs are drawn along a time-marked x-axis, each
                        corresponding to a single gun-related fatality. Each arc is divided into two
                        colour coded segments: An initial orange section encodes the age to which a
                        victim of gun-violence lived, and the rest of the arc, drawn in white,
                        stretches to the point of their projected life expectancy, according to
                        demographic-specific health data. As each line is drawn, a name and age are
                        shown, and a global counter displays the increasing total number of stolen
                        years. Like FTE, this visualisation manufactures attributes not in the
                        original dataset (projected life expectancies); however, it does so in a
                        much more contextual way — using individualised demographic data — and also
                        makes it clear that this data is not sure. Further, it deliberately embraces
                        what FTE sought to avoid through the clustering of migrants into groups of
                        25: the illegible 'hairball' created by including a visual representation of
                        each person. Visualisation is argument; rather than using detachment and
                        aggregation in the aim of persuading through logos, this affective
                        visualisation leverages pathos in the form of the emotional potential of
                        overwhelming individuality.
                
                
                    Humanistically Data-Driven?
                    The modern data economy, asserts Kate Crawford, is premised on the dual
                        operations of abstraction and extraction . Data itself
                        is an extraction of the perceived most salient parts from a phenomenon, and
                        the aim of this processing is to create representations which all conform to
                        an abstract model. The labour of the creators is similarly extracted, while
                        their presence is abstracted away. As an example, she points to data
                        training sets which are at the foundation of our increasingly AI-driven
                        world. Echoing aspects of the BADDR data issues Walter identified, Crawford
                        highlights the fact that one of the most well established datasets for
                        facial recognition (MEDS) is composed of prison mugshots collected over a
                        subject’s multiple arrests, used without their consent and often featuring
                        severe injuries, and that a similarly well-regarded dataset for emotion
                        classification (CK+) is principally composed of images of feigned emotion.
                        Yet, when ingested into a dataset, the personal, social, and political
                        meanings of images representing individual people and the power exerted by
                        societal structures are all imagined to be neutralized . When integrated into a dataset, argues Crawford, there is a shift from
                        image to infrastructure, where the meaning and care that might be given to
                        an individual person, or the context behind a scene is presumed to be erased
                        at the moment it becomes part of an aggregate mass that will drive a broader
                        system 
                    Mechanisms such as Ghebru et al’s Datasheets for Datasets 
                        make preliminary strides toward attending to the issues raised by Crawford.
                        This exercise, which emerged out of the critical computing movement, asks
                        developers to reflect on questions regarding a dataset’s:
                    
                        Motivation: Who funded and undertook the creation of the dataset, and
                            what was their intended purpose?
                        Composition and Processing: What does each instance represent, how is
                            it labelled or broken down, what is the coverage of the dataset as a
                            whole, and where might there be gaps?
                        Uses, Maintenance, and Distribution: How will the data be used and how
                            could it be used poorly; how will data sharing and updating be
                            controlled; and who will be responsible for these actions?
                    
                    Mitchell et. al’s Model Cards look to fulfil a similar purpose with respect
                        to the models built from and for these datasets. In recognition of the fact
                        that these models are often used in high-impact tasks in areas such as law
                        enforcement, medicine, education, and employment , the
                        authors propose that models be published with an accompanying model card,
                        which details its intended use (and contexts where it should not be used);
                        provide benchmarked evaluations across conditions involving different groups
                        (cultural, demographic, phenotypic) of subjects, including intersectional
                        groups; describe the agents and procedures involved in its creation; and
                        provide ethical considerations.
                    Both datasheets and model cards are working toward transparency in the aim of
                        democratising of Machine Learning (ML) and, specifically, Artificial
                        Intelligence (AI) technologies. However, whatever checks and balances these
                        provide, there remains the challenge in DH that these technologies embody
                        epistemic principles which, in many cases, run counter to those of
                        humanistic inquiry; they are, as Crawford describes, frequently fed
                        decontextualised data and are operating under the premise that consensus is
                        success, leaving no room for positionality.
                    For Lucy Havens, there needs to be a shift away from removing social biases
                        and towards acknowledging them, so as to creat[e] data and models that
                        surface the uncertainty and multiplicity characteristic of human societies
                        . As a step toward the creation of a
                        Bias-Aware Methodology for the use of AI/ML in DH, she highlights four
                        major priorities of AI/ML and describes corresponding humanistic
                        recalibrations — all of which relate back to questions of context and
                        positionality. The first priority Havens highlights is Quantity. AI/ML
                        practice and, in particular, performance evaluation has a noted focus on the
                        data set size and volume of model parameters, which communicates an
                        underlying assumption that bigger is better . The
                        corresponding recalibration is Quality; Havens suggests using qualitative
                        methods to critically analyse dataset and model composition. To counter the
                        priority of Efficiency, which often manifests as the creation of
                        good-enough metrics which are over-simplified, vaguely defined, or reduce
                        subjective tasks to a single interpretation , she offers
                        Accuracy — not in the sense of the success of a classification model on a
                        dataset contrived to be amenable to its logics, but regarding the creation
                        of metrics which are meaningful in real world contexts. These importantly
                        can not remain fixed but must be continually adapted as society evolves. The
                        third priority is Convenience, referring to the way in which AI/ML culture
                        will reach for easily-obtained data, often created through online crowd work
                        or — as in the case of MEDS — by exploiting marginalised populations. The
                        corresponding recalibration is Representativeness — a focus on the curation
                        of datasets which are representative of the population to which the models
                        will be applied, so as to avoid the widespread existing issue of models
                        which demonstrate obvious bias and prejudice. The lack of consideration of
                        representativeness is in part a consequence of the final priority: Universal
                        Thinking. This is a product of a valuation of the generalisable and neutral.
                        Situated Thinking is the evident humanistic counter.
                    Maxime Bernier insisted that there is no such thing as Indigenous math;
                        from this we might infer that he would similarly not believe in Indigenous
                        computing. That, however, is precisely what nehiyaw-Métis artist and
                        programmer Jon Corbett has worked to develop. Corbett describes how, in his
                        journey learning computing, he continually fought to avoid conforming to
                        the design and language of the computer, instead breaking and rewriting as
                        many computational rules as possible (e.g. altering to be less efficient,
                        but more reflective of the processes he was modelling), to instead have the
                        computer understand how I wanted to [process/create information]  —                                   in a way that was reflective of an Indigenous worldview. This
                        experience culminated in his creation of Cree#, a programming language that
                        is Indigenous in its structure, symbology, syntax, and purpose. It is built
                        around the metaphor of code as story and written entirely in Aboriginal
                        Syllabics. The declaration of a function translates to this is a collected
                        story called [function name], and the keywords for looping and conditionals
                        are drawn for natural metaphors. The act of smudging, which is an
                        indigenous cleansing ritual, has been computationally transcribed as a
                        command which prepares the program for running by clearing the screen and
                        any cached memory. An intended possible output of a Cree# program is a
                        rendering of beaded artwork that is a traditional means of encoding and
                        transmitting stories.
                    Posing a challenge of sorts to the DH community, Drucker questions whether it
                        is possible to undertake meaningful humanistic scholarship using tools that
                        preclude humanistic methods from their operations because of the very
                        assumptions on which they are designed: that objects of knowledge can be
                        understood as self-identical, self-evident, ahistorical, and autonomous
                        . No matter where one stands on this question, the
                        reality is that, despite these mismatches — which are specifically a
                        reflection of differing epistemological stances relating to context and
                        positionality — digital humanists are actively choosing to use computational
                        tools and methods because they are interested in the analytic possibilities
                        and perspectives these represent. Doing this humanistically, whether it is
                        a question, as Corbett has done, of reimagining tools to align with
                        humanistic intentions or, more simply (and accessibly), of accounting for
                        and adapting to the epistemological underpinnings of existing ones, an
                        awareness of this friction point is essential to the knowledge production
                        work of DH.
                
            

                Relationship to Tools
                Born scarcely twelve years apart — in 1911 and 1923 respectively — Marshall
                    McLuhan and Peter Elias both lived through the passage of computers from
                    room-sized systems limited to small academic and governmental spheres toward
                    much more ubiquitous and accessible technology. Being witness to this
                    development seemingly gave them foresight to predict where computing was headed:
                    toward independence and invisibility.
                Elias, a computer scientist and information theory pioneer, believed that the
                    ultimate goal for computing was to become frictionless. He imagined a future
                    where the machine would be able to carry out complex processes with minimal
                    instruction and intervention, insisting that if it continues to demand as much
                    effort to learn how to speak to machines as it costs us to teach students a
                    course for a couple of semesters, then we have failed .
                    The interest, for Elias, lay not in dialoguing with the computer, but in the
                    development of tools which could understand problems and solve them
                    independently. Implicit to this proposal is the equivalence — at least
                    perceived, if not actual — of human and machine logics.
                McLuhan foresaw a similar convergence or at least confusion of logics, not as a
                    technologist but as a media theorist. He placed the computer in a long history
                    of technologies — media — that have altered the way in which we view and
                    interact with the world. In a pattern that has occurred again and again, when it
                    first emerges, a new technology is strange and new, and we are correspondingly
                    highly aware of the way in which it is mediating our experience; as time passes,
                    the technology and the processes surrounding its use become more formalised,
                    normalised, then internalised such that we are less likely to notice its
                    presence. Unlike Elias, McLuhan was wary of this eventuality. McLuhan describes
                    media in terms of extensions and amputations of the body. A shovel, for
                    instance, is an extension of the arm, enhancing its capability; similarly, a
                    microscope is an extension of the eye . When pushed to an
                    extreme, these extensions become replacements for specific capabilities and
                    processes. Media amputate what they render obsolete, altering our behaviour; the
                    telephone, for instance, extends the voice but amputates skills in penmanship
                    and composition. He had a particular anxiety around digital media because he
                    understood them as extensions of the nervous system and, more importantly, the
                    brain. McLuhan worried about the utter human docility  that
                    the extreme of amputating core cognition could represent.
                In our modern context, as advancements in computing continually work to blur the
                    boundary between user and interface intention  and
                    McLuhan’s fears have come to bear in the extreme in the form of generative
                    AI , the Digital Humanities are left to grapple with the place of the
                    constantly elided human in computational work. What does interpretive and
                    embodied knowledge production look like when it is, in part, the product of a
                    machine? How do we go about analysing and critiquing its influence? The
                    relationship between human and machine is central to the core methodological
                    discussions of DH .
                
                    Separation and Transplantation
                    The prevalent use of computers in scientific disciplines is consistent with
                        the way in which they have historically used other tools: in service of
                        mechanical objectivity. This notion of using machines to augment and
                        automate procedures in order to circumvent the faults of the human senses
                        which might obscure the objective truth predates computers. The introduction
                        of photography is a seminal example, the mechanical image as amputated eye
                        becoming the emblem for all aspects of non-interventionist objectivity
                        . The realities of the use of photography in its earliest
                        days give the strongest insight into the motivation behind its inclusion: It
                        was not because the photograph was more obviously faithful to nature than
                        handmade images — many paintings bore a closer resemblance to their subject
                        matter than early photographs, if only because they used color — but because
                        the camera apparently eliminated human agency .
                    Since it extends the brain, it is the faults of cognition that are
                        addressed by computation. In the early days of computing, faults
                        essentially referred to procedural errors that might occur in mathematical
                        calculation — of Bernoulli numbers, of missile trajectories, etc. What is
                        being extended is not the reasoning behind the problem solving, but the
                        speed, scale, and precision with which it can be done. In cases such as
                        these, the delegation of cognition is arguably largely unproblematic; the
                        problems are solved with strictly defined procedures that could be used by
                        any person to arrive at an identical answer — the assumptions subsumed by
                        the amputation are minimal and well-understood. Scientific instruments,
                        explains Lisa Gitelman, are matters of consensus within a given community.
                        When a new instrument is invented or introduced, there is a period where its
                        proponents must demonstrate persuasively that it does or means what they
                        say. After this point, as its use becomes more common, its general
                        acceptance soon helps make it a transparent fact of scientific practice
                        . The tool and its surrounding protocols are rendered
                        self-evident such that scientists look through the instrument the way one
                        looks through a telescope, without getting caught up in battles already won
                        over whether and how it does the job . 
                    In computing, these battles were won at a time where the capabilities of the
                        technology were more limited and the user base more constrained, but the
                        established transparency means that the impact of the mediation continues to
                        remain unquestioned. However, using a limited set of machine instructions to
                        automate the calculation of mathematical tables and using a high-level
                        language to sketch a model to suggest insurance premiums or parole
                        sentences, for instance, represent two very different models of working with
                        machines. In the latter case, what is being extended and, eventually,
                        amputated, is no longer well defined and delimited procedures, but reasoning
                        and intuition. This usage is understood in the continuity of mechanical
                        objectivity — circumventing cognitive bias as opposed to simple faults of
                        the senses — and is attributed the same tacit trust despite not having been
                        subjected to the same requirements of general agreement and
                        understandability that underpinned the invisibilisation of the former.
                    Media are culturally defined. Our interactions with technology drive its
                        evolution which in turn influences future interaction. This circular
                        influence means that media come to reflect the beliefs and values of the
                        culture from which they emerge , which is what allows them to
                        become invisible. In light of this, the invisibility of a medium should
                        theoretically be disrupted when transposed to a different context. However,
                        the mechanistic nature of early DH allowed norms to be ported without
                        interrogation or adjustment. In the now infamous case of Father Busa’s Index
                        Thomisticus , for instance, the problem of creating
                        a large concordance resembles the problems of early computing in that the
                        procedure is well defined and associated assumptions minimal, explainable,
                        and generally well understood by the relevant community. This does not hold
                        in the case of the interpretive and ambiguous problems of more modern DH,
                        where the more complex extension of reasoning is at play .
                        Here, scientific epistemic notions embedded in the technology stand to alter
                        and shape humanistic inquiry in a way that might contradict the values of
                        the latter tradition — an influence that often passes unnoticed because of
                        the pre-established invisibility of the medium.
                    The choice of the fruit fly as an instrument has played a major role in
                        defining genetics as a discipline, argues Gitelman. If a different organism
                        were used genetics itself would be a substantively different field —
                        insofar as, for instance, the pacing of research and framing of questions
                        are concerned. She recognizes that [t]he particular authority of science
                        makes this an uncomfortable claim, but one that in that in other contexts,
                        however, would seem to be evident: 
                    [J]ust as it makes no sense to appreciate an artwork without attending to
                        its medium (painted in watercolors or oils? sculpted in granite or
                        Styrofoam?) it makes no sense to think about content without attending to
                        the medium that both communicates that content and represents or helps to
                        set the limits of what that content can consist of. Even when the content in
                        question is what has for the last century or so been termed information,
                        it cannot be considered free of or apart from the media that help to
                        define it. 
                    Many humanistic disciplines have a history of considering the impact of
                        mediation — any scholar of early modern literature, for instance, would
                        argue the necessity of considering the nature of the novel as a medium when
                        analysing literary trends. In DH, however, there is a certain blind spot
                        when it comes to computer mediation.
                    Media scholar Anthony Masure insists that DH digital tools rarely reflect the
                        epistemological tensions between computing and the humanities because they
                        hide the primary characteristic of computers: their facility for processing
                        symbols ; layers of abstraction obscure the base mechanisms
                        to create the 'natural' interactions of Elias’ imagination. In order to be
                        able to actually see and analyse the impact of the computational medium, it
                        is necessary to understand its specificity. Media specificity is defined by
                        essentially what Masure is pointing to: how the medium inscribes
                        information. Computing is somewhat unique in that it inscribes both
                        procedure and artefact. 'Doing' computation is mapping human understandings
                        of structure and process to a specific format that is manipulable by a
                        machine. The mediation is the adjustment made to the original conception to
                        conform to a paradigm that is defined and bounded by the way in which
                        information is represented. We cannot continue to ignore how machine
                        algorithms read literary information, insist literary DH scholars Long
                        and So, while blindly relying on them to enhance our own reading and
                        interpretative practices. . Understanding what
                        machine ‘reading’ represents requires understanding its underlying
                        computationality — which is to say the structured reasoning and symbolic
                        encoding that define the medium .
                
                
                    A Complex Relationship Dynamic
                    The implications of underlying computationality are precisely the subject of
                        D. Sculley and Bradley Pasanek’s treatise on the use of Machine Learning in
                        DH. Their core argument is that computational learnability theory, which
                        guarantees the learnability of arbitrary concepts, makes assumptions that
                        are at odds with those of humanistic knowledge production. For instance, it
                        first assumes that data is produced by some process with constant
                        probabilistic qualities  — which crucially
                        means it does not change over time — and that examples can be drawn from it
                        identically and independently. This assumption is what enables formal
                        generalisation and creates the conditions for the proof that a hypothesis
                        learned on early data can be used to make predictions about later data. It
                        is, however, an assumption that rarely holds with respect to humanities
                        data. Historians and scholars of culture, for instance, are frequently
                        interested in change over time; they fully expect the dataset they are
                        working to exhibit some non-constant behaviour. The required existence of a
                        fixed distribution also implies the existence of some level of fixed truth
                        which, as seen, is a troubling notion in a humanistic context. The further
                        learnability assumptions of a fixed size hypothesis space and representative
                        data similarly butt up against the notions of situated knowledge and data
                        constructedness. Consequently, Sculley and Pasanek assert that ML tools and
                        techniques, which are built on the foundation of this theory of
                        learnability, can not be used to prove claims in the humanities in the
                        same way they do in the natural sciences, where the validity of the
                        evidence lies inherent in the technology . They
                        argue that ML models in DH are only made relevant through critical
                        interpretation — not only on the level of the content, but also of the
                        experimental method. The latter demands engaging with the ways in which the
                        specific demands of the computational tools influenced the procedure and
                        results , something that is notably particularly difficult
                        in the realm of ML/AI, where the explainability of deep learning models
                        evolved through training remains an open challenge .
                    In his work on sentiment analysis of the poetry of the Black Arts Movement
                        (BAM), Ethan Reed offers at once a critique and defence of the use of
                        computational methods in humanities contexts — both of which rely on
                        look[ing] carefully at the nitty-gritty details [of] what these tools are,
                        how they work, as well as the biases and assumptions they bring to any
                        analyses they might perform . It is Reed’s awareness of
                        the demands and limitations of the computational medium which led him to
                        ascertain from the start that his corpus was rife with what he terms
                        computational resistance. The formal features that create meaning in the
                        poetic form (e.g. use of vernacular, irregular white space, deliberate word
                        misspellings or transformations) would defy, bewilder, or otherwise
                        frustrate computational reading practices at its various stages because of
                        their connotations which do not align with those of dominant canonical
                        forms; however, facilitating analysis by manipulating these texts such that
                        they are more amenable to computational forms of reading [...] often
                        involves manipulating the voice of the poet by making changes to the
                        original text . Reed insists that computational
                        techniques can nonetheless be useful in the study of these poetic texts if
                        the analysis places results in dialogue with these challenges. Using
                        PatternAnalyzer, a pattern-based classifier, Reed was surprised to find that
                        it classified what he perceived to be one of the most positive poems in the
                        corpus — ‘Come Sing a Song’ — as the single most negative text. He
                        discovered that this came down to the model routinely classifying the word
                        Black as negative, despite the racial sense being designated as neutral in
                        the model lexicon. Reed hypothesised — calculations appearing to confirm —
                        that, failing to resolve the term’s polysemy, the model simply averaged the
                        valence values of the three possible senses of black', resulting in an
                        overall negative. This course of action, though guessable because of the
                        rule-based nature of the model, was completely black-boxed and not even
                        featured in documentation. The classifier similarly struggled with terms
                        whose sentiment was made opposite in the context of the poem (e.g. bad in
                        the line sing a bad freedom song). Studying the classifier’s struggles,
                        Reed insists, contributed to a deeper consideration of the question of
                        audience and, correspondingly, tone, which can be conceptualised in terms of
                        an author’s perception of their audience. A positive reading of Come Sing a
                        Song would have relied on a specific interpretation of terms that is born
                        of belonging to the community for which the poem was intended. One of the
                        most terminologically violent poems — ‘The True Import of the Present
                        Dialogue, Black vs. Negro’ — was determined by PatternAnalyzer to be
                        relatively neutral; this occurred through a combination of the fact that the
                        classifier simply marked vernacular terms for which it had no lexicon entry
                        as neutral and the way in which 'negative' terms were often accompanied by
                        'positive' ones (e.g. shoot straight), the scores essentially cancelling
                        out. The latter phenomenon, though born of misunderstanding (in human
                        terms), is an interesting computational reflection of the concept of
                        'measured protest', which scholars had previously identified in BAM poems. 
                    A different classifier, Vader, which was trained in a way that sees it
                        perform better on vernacular text and demonstrate more sensitivity to
                        sentiment intensity, while coming closer to the mark with Come Sing a
                        Song, performed a surface-level reading of The True Import, marking it as
                        extremely negative. It failed to capture the positive negativity —
                        strategically employed anger — that Reed and critics see in the poem by
                        virtue of knowledge of vision of a broader social purpose 
                        . That said, Reed asserts that 
                        the light shed by VADER’s peculiar
                        evaluative logic as to why this poem seems so negative allowed me to reflect
                        more seriously on my own understanding of the poem, as well as that of the
                        many other critics who have noted its particular affective charge .
                        The value Reed finds in digital tools is in the way in which
                        they [do] not transform the text the way that a
                        human reader does ; the challenge lies in not conflating
                        the two when the computational mechanics are often black-boxed away for
                        ease of use, which, as described by Stephen Ramsay and Geoffrey Rockwell
                        install[s] the user at a level of abstraction far above whatever
                        theoretical claims might lie beneath. 
                    While Reed’s explorations focused on the use of tools in DH, there is also
                        the question of the construction of computational artefacts. The act of
                        ‘building’ has been central to DH since the field’s inception; however,
                        there is complex debate over whether it (in isolation) ‘counts’ as
                        scholarship under the epistemologies of both constituent disciplines.  offer three interrelated framings of DH tools and three
                        corresponding arguments for building as a valid form of humanistic, and
                        therefore DH, scholarship. They first argue that DH tools can be considered
                        theories (in the humanistic more so than scientific sense — something that
                        explains rather than predicts) because they embody a specific discourse.
                        Digital artifacts have a procedural rhetoric; the information they choose to
                        display and the way they afford specific user interactions is an argument.
                        Because of this inherent orientation, Ramsey and Rockwell assert that
                        computational tools can also act as theoretical lenses, in that they help us
                        see things differently; as hermeneutical instruments they are undoubtedly
                        valid under a knowledge-culture built around interpretation. Finally, they
                        propose the notion of the digital as a theoretical model. Computing is a
                        modelling discipline because any computing system is an explicit, delimited
                        conception of the world or model of it . Ramsey and
                        Rockwell draw a parallel between the coding used to create such a model and
                        the writing used to express specific conceptions of the world in more
                        traditional humanistic scholarship. They argue that the understanding that
                        comes of the manipulation of features, objects, and states of interest in
                        programming is equivalent to that born of having to put things into writing.
                        They notably highlight that the words (or code) by themselves are not the
                        scholarship, but the modelling process behind them, which is highly
                        dependent on the medium of expression.
                    What unites the three framings Ramsey & Rockwell propose — and indeed,
                        Sculley & Pasanek and Reed’s work — is that they are all a question of
                        thinking with computers. Each relationship described relies on an
                        understanding of computational mediation, on seeing the ways in which the
                        machine’s inscription and processing of information transform phenomena and
                        treating it as another voice in an ongoing discourse, to be accounted for in
                        analysis and used as part of idea generation. There is a fine line between
                        this thinking with and the alternative of thinking like computers — which is
                        to say deliberately, if often unconsciously, trying to structure our
                        conceptions to be amenable to computation . David Berry
                        argues that we are witnessing an increasing operationalisation or
                        mechanisation of thought; when we cede intention to computational
                        suggestions we are confounding human reasoning with algorithmic
                        conceptualizations of their ideas, the latter of which are increasingly
                        constructed from information collected from millions of users and are
                        therefore inescapably anchored in hegemonic frameworks such as capitalism
                        and white supremacy. As Berry describes,
                    [...] Rather than acting as bicycles for the mind,
                        
                         A phrase initially
                            coined by Steve Jobs, meant to describe, according to Berry, the way in
                            which computers stood to augmen[t] the cognitive capacities of the
                            user, making them faster and more capable.
                        
                        these technologies replace certain cognitive functions of the mind. Being
                        owned and controlled by corporate organisations they tend to weaken
                        explanatory and critical thinking and instead nudge and influence human
                        behaviour in directions that are profitable . 
                        
                    The sort of replacement Berry outlines could more moderately be understood as
                        the normalisation and invisibilisation that, as seen, is part of the life
                        cycle of any representational medium. In this light, we might see the core
                        challenge of DH’s relationship to machines as walking the line between like
                        and with — analysing the nature and impact of mediation so as to be able to
                        decide when and to what extent delegation is acceptable, and when and how to
                        undertake generative co-creation.
                    
                    Edsger Dijkstra is famously known to have argued that computer science is no
                        more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes. Attribution
                            is contested In this, he implies that there can exist a complete
                        separation between logical process and the machine being used to express it.
                        Dijkstra was strongly against what he saw as the de-mathematisation of
                        computing, which opened it up to broader use. He spoke out, for instance,
                        against the development of early high-level programming language, COBOL,
                        insisting that it sought to replace intellectual discipline by management
                        discipline . Perhaps in Dijkstra’s idealised framing, it
                        might have been feasible to separate human logic from machine expression; if
                        the applications remain limited and carried out by experts, there can be a
                        clear and well-understood mapping between human and machine problem
                        representations. The impact of mediation is minimal because the problem
                        domain and the context from which the medium emerged are one and the same.
                        As — contrary to Dijkstra’s wishes — the reach of computing has broadened,
                        the mapping between problem and representation has become more complex and
                        less evident, but the assumptions baked into the acceptance and
                        invisibilisation of the medium remain those established in that limited
                        context and expert community. The introduction of the digital to humanistic
                        scholarship has provoked a major change in how information can be viewed and
                        processed, and birthed new methodologies which, for all they may mimic the
                        old ones, inescapably operate differently. Computation forces us to rethink
                        our current disciplinary practices in the humanities from the ground up,
                        asserts Andrew Piper — What counts as evidence? What is the relationship
                        between theory and practice? How do we account for the technological
                        mediations of our critique? . These questions all come back
                        to the influence of the way the machine thinks on humanistic work. The
                        machine, of course, does not think; the way it structures and processes
                        information is a product of a specific epistemic perspective. Now that we
                        are pointing it at so much more than the stars, it is essential to consider
                        the telescope.
                
            

                Hermeneutic Attention
                When working with computer scientists on digital visualisation tools, art
                    historians on Project Cornelia were left feeling that the tech kids are running
                    too fast . Houda Lamqaddam — one of the tech kids —
                    explains that the art historians found speed of development and release was at
                    odds with the contemplative nature of their research. Artworks, through the
                    methodological lens of art historians, are elements that trigger reflection
                    rather than contain answers, an outlook that contrasts digital interfaces which
                    present the user with synthesized views of data and answers to research
                    questions. Contributions in art history, due to the inherent subjectivity of
                    the field, often consist of making a claim denoting a unique perspective — one
                    that is based in in-depth artwork analysis that put[s] into evidence
                    previously unexplored nuances. Though, as seen, it is arguably embodied in the
                    tools, the use of aggregates, statistics and data-crunching algorithms by
                    computer scientists is viewed as an approach where the reflection and the nuance
                    disappear. For art historians, Lamqaddam asserts, the intervention of the
                    digital threatens their operational paradigm. In investigating their reticence
                    to engage with the digital, she focuses on the perceived speed difference, but
                    this mismatch could be viewed as an element of a broader question of divergent
                    approaches to interpretation.
                Interpretation is how information becomes knowledge; this sense-making is
                    inherently a part of any discipline. There is a common process of pattern
                    matching and formalisation — a collection of examples will be interpreted to
                    propose a more or less abstract theory demonstrating or explaining a phenomenon
                    . Where domains differ is in the emphasis they place on aspects of
                    this process. The heart of the scholarship for the art historians is the process
                    by which they arrive at their conclusions. They were discomforted by the work of
                    the developers, as the interpretation that went into the choice of encoding
                    entities and relationships to illustrate specific theories of connection was, if
                    not hidden, certainly not easily legible to the historians presented with the
                    finished interface — an object which, for the developers, was understood to be
                    the primary contribution. Underwood proposes that humanists tend to think of
                    computer science as an instrumental rather than philosophical discourse
                    . This is untrue, he argues, highlighting how, for instance, the
                    Bayesian statistics driving many machine learning algorithms encode a specific
                    way of reasoning in their acknowledgement that we approach every question with
                    some previous assumptions (called prior probabilities), as well as particular
                    kinds of uncertainty . This interpretive cycle of existing
                    assumptions iteratively changing through the introduction of new evidence,
                    Underwood insists, should be familiar to humanists, and recognisably valid under
                    their paradigm of knowledge creation; however, it is seldom visible or legible.
                    Digital humanists are caught between — and left to reconcile — implicit and
                    explicit hermeneutic traditions.
                
                    Divergent Traditions
                    There is no self-critical hermeneutic tradition in the sciences comparable
                        to that taken for granted by other scholars, argues ,
                        as descried by  — the other gesturing to the
                        humanities and social sciences. Markus is not making a critique, but an
                        observation; he posits that it is a case of scientific domains constructing
                        themselves such that they do not need a strong hermeneutic tradition. Markus
                        points to scientific knowledge diffusion as a prime example. In interviews
                        with biologists,  noted that many described an aspect of
                        intuition as essential to correctly carrying out experimental procedures,
                        but equally that this was not in any way integrated into methodology or
                        reporting. Since the late 19th century, scientific publications have been
                        characterised by their passivity; the figure of the author — the knowledge
                        interpreter — is effaced. This is not intended to imply that no
                        interpretation has taken place but rather that the reader’s interpretation,
                        specifically of the procedures and logic from which a conclusion was
                        derived, will never differ from that of the author. The ideology [...] of
                        the natural sciences, Markus argues regards any acceptable scientific text
                        as totally self-sufficient as to its meaning (and therefore as unambiguously
                        clear to any reader with adequate competence) . The
                        adequate competence to which he is referring is knowledge of rigidly
                        defined and strictly encoded axioms and procedures. Curtailing alternative
                        interpretations is one of the functions of the language of the natural
                            sciences For all computing is arguably not one of the natural
                            sciences, it nonetheless largely mirrors their operation., which
                        is defined by these sign-systems. By virtue of their use, it is understood
                        that the writer and the reader have the same conception of what is being
                        described. When the writer and the reader are interchangeable, there is
                        nothing to be interpreted.
                    Elements of the sign-system are viewed as beyond interrogation — a framing
                        enabled by the decontextualized and ahistorical way in which they are
                        taught. Markus notes that, whereas humanities students are expected to
                        interrogate Aristotle’s works in light of the context of their creation and
                        with respect to different readings over time, the version of Newton’s laws
                        written in textbooks is something Newton should have written had he used
                        modern mathematical notations, contemporary physical concepts, etc. For all
                        that, as Markus implies, the meaning of these and other theories and
                        expressions changes as science progresses, they are posited as designating
                            well-identifiable, singular historical phenomena and events . The interpretation behind building blocks of scientific knowledge
                        production is subsumed by definitive signs. Mathematics education
                        researcher Stephen Brown relates the anecdote of a physics professor who
                        insisted that the only things that count in proving anything are axioms,
                        definitions, rules of logic and previously established theorems ; having forgotten one of the axioms of vector space, the
                        professor, mumbling under his breath, turned his back to the class to derive
                        it on the blackboard, taking care to hide his work and hastily erasing it
                        before returning to his lecture in attempt to remain consistent with his
                        earlier assertion. Brown argues that this handing down of detached axioms in
                        an authoritarian and non-controversial way leads us to believe that they
                        were created in a way that involved no labor pains and in particular no
                        negotiation between what was considered worth proving and what was taken for
                        granted . Interpretation is considered a key step of
                        theoretical mathematical modelling, however, the process of modelling is
                        rarely taught. Even in the rare cases that it is, student assessment has a
                        tendency to focus on the overall outcome rather than considering the
                        learner’s progress through modelling steps or sub-processes .
                        Hermeneutics in the sciences, per Markus, is not synonymous with learning —
                        as might be said in the case of the humanities — but prerequisite to it.
                        Interpretation is a tacit dimension .
                    Interpretation is anything but tacit in the humanities. As previously
                        discussed, the humanities lack a conception of absolute truth. In the
                        absence of a definitive answer, there is nothing left but interpretation. In
                        his book on literary criticism and computational text analysis, Reading
                        Machines, Ramsay writes:
                    However far ranging a scientific debate might be, however varied the
                        interpretations being offered, the assumption remains that there is a
                        singular answer (or a singular set of answers) to the question at hand.
                        Literary criticism has no such assumption. In the humanities the fecundity
                        of any particular discussion is often judged precisely by the degree to
                        which it offers ramified solutions to the problem at hand. We are not trying
                        to solve Woolf. We are trying to ensure that discussion of The Waves
                        continues. 
                    Ramsay’s assertion highlights a key distinction between the two hermeneutic
                        traditions. The humanities tend toward the dialogic, looking for the
                        interplay of multiple interpretations, whereas as the sciences are aiming
                        for consensus and, correspondingly, are more monologic in their practices.
                        Computer science is grounded in a problem solving paradigm and the
                        humanities in a problematising one .
                    Because of this difference in aim, technology use as it has been implemented
                        in one discipline may not be identically useful in the other. This mismatch
                        was at the forefront of the minds behind the Humanities Networked
                        Infrastructure (HuNI) project . HuNI, which looks to make
                        Australian cultural data from myriad institutions centrally accessible and
                        interrogable, was funded as part of a larger network of digital
                        laboratories to support data-centred research work, the rest of which were
                        anchored in scientific contexts. Correspondingly, the proposed parameters
                        very much followed in line with a big science model of data processes —
                        aiming to simplify and streamline established data workflows. The team
                        behind HuNI did not see these priorities as suitable for humanities research
                        needs and set out to create a modified paradigm deliberately constructed to
                        enabl[e] researchers to express, share and discuss their differing
                        interpretations of the data . HuNI is
                        structured around graphs generated by user-created connections between
                        cultural data entities (e.g. works, places, people) imported from different
                        organisations. All connections are public by default, are not required to
                        fit into any pre-defined ontology, and can be annotated with detailed
                        meaning such that different perspectives between (and within) disciplines
                        are preserved and foregrounded, instead of being hidden behind a normalized,
                        authoritative framework. . Its creators note
                        that HuNI is specifically designed to promote the kind of serendipitous
                        encounters that are fruitful in the humanities , rather than
                        looking to scaffold any sort of optimal trajectory or set of operations.
                        An environment that affords serendipity is one in which there is enough
                        structure to maintain relevance but not so much as to suppress the
                        unexpected or unpredicted and where there exists multiple perspectives and
                        the ability to meander among these different understandings and
                        conceptualisations of the world and knowledge . 
                    Encountering the same friction as the HUNI team,  describe a pivotal scene for their work on                                visualisation in DH where one member of an interdisciplinary project committee posed the
                        pointed question, with respect to project outcomes: Are we building tools
                        or just sandcastles? The source of the committee member’s frustration, they
                        argue, is a mismatch in how the term ‘tool’ is understood in science and the
                        humanities. In the former context, it is related to ‘prototype,’ and
                        understood as the stabilised and often generalised endpoint of iteration.
                        The successive prototypes are a means to an end rather than object[s] of
                        inquiry  in their own right. Humanistic understandings
                        tend instead to frame tools as narrative and generative — an element of a
                        process rather than a product. DH visualisations are, correspondingly, often
                        small scale and highly specific. Hinrichs et al. defend the metaphor of the
                        sandcastle as it does not permit a focus product. A sandcastle is always
                        transient, will always be taken by the tide at the end of the day. The
                        point is to build and rebuild, learning and changing without the
                        constraints of a defined endpoint or a need to reach it. The emphasis is
                        therefore on the ludic act of sandcastling, which they describe as a
                        dynamic process wherein speculation and re-interpretation advance
                        knowledge . The success of humanistic visualisations,
                        argue Sinclair et al., should be evaluated as a function of how well they
                        support interpretive activity, asserting that the humanities approach
                        consists not of converging toward a single interpretation that cannot be
                        challenged but rather of examining the objects of study from as many
                        reasonable and original perspectives as possible to develop convincing
                        interpretations .
                
                
                    Developing Digital Hermeneutics
                    For as long as humanities scholars have made use of digital tools, asserts
                        Eef Masson, they have met with critique from fellow practitioners [...]
                        stem[ming] from the perception that the projects conducted do not do justice
                        to the critical-interpretive legacy of much humanities research . With its departure from traditional close reading and its use of
                        computational tools and methods in ways which do not necessarily align with
                        the conventions of hypothesis-driven scientific research, detractors of DH
                        accuse it of being both methodologically bereft and interpretation-poor, and
                        correspondingly lacking in validity under the either disciplinary
                        epistemology  . Out of this critique has
                        emerged a nascent digital hermeneutics, with a two-pronged goal of making
                        explicit the interpretation implicit to digital methods and tools, so as to
                        situate their use in the humanistic hermeneutic tradition, and of
                        articulating the ways in which their design and use can be adapted to make
                        space for interpretation.
                    The coordinators of the University of Luxembourg’s Digital History and
                        Hermeneutics Doctoral Training Unit (DTU) insist that digital hermeneutics
                        must concern itself with how digital tools and infrastructures are
                        transforming historical research practices in all stages of the iterative
                        research process and should operate as a critical framework for making the
                        methodological and epistemological tensions in current history practices
                        explicit . They correspondingly chose to structure the
                        DTU’s training and projects around the notion of hands-on Thinkering: a
                        heuristic mode of doing that combines playful tinkering with critical
                        thinking . Emblematic of this approach, kiara and Lumy
                        are a paired set of the DTU’s research projects that together form a virtual
                        research environment which scaffolds Thinkering . kiara
                        — which acts as a backend to Lumy but can also be used independently via
                        command line — is described by its creators as a data orchestration
                        engine. It supports the creation and analysis of network graphs by breaking
                        workflow steps that would typically be subsumed into a single script down
                        into functional modules. These can be rearranged and chained to create any
                        number of bespoke pipelines. A user can also create custom modules; each is
                        specified by an expected input and output, process description, and
                        associated process python code. Though things are compartmentalised, nothing
                        is blackboxed. What makes kiara different from similar workflow management
                        tools emerged from a software development context is its focus on metadata
                        management and iterative user interaction. It keeps a tree-structured log of
                        every user interaction, allowing the user to reflect on their process and
                        easily trace the lineage of any data result. Lumy is similarly intended to
                        encourage users to adopt recursive, self-reflexive and reproducible work
                        practices. It sits on top of kiara, giving GUI access to the network
                        manipulation functionality in one part of the interface, while also
                        providing space in another panel for users to take notes on their practice.
                        The aim of associating metadata snapshots with researcher reflections is to
                        cultivat[e] the holistic practice of interweaving methodology, data, code,
                        and metadata with a narrative of researcher’s choices and actions
                        . This deliberate pairing of the the ability to
                        record what the software is doing with the ability to record what the
                        scholar is doing  brings the interpretation
                        underlying the use of computational tools to the forefront.
                    Emergent digital hermeneutics must honour and encompass established
                        disciplinary hermeneutic approaches. A significant proportion of DH work is
                        connected to literary studies; however, the kind of abstract data that is
                        generated from texts using statistical and computational methods is not
                        the kind of data that literary scholars practicing an [sic] hermeneutic
                        approach are concerned with . Literary hermeneutics
                        is an approach to produce meaning through an iterative, non-deterministic,
                        and subjective procedure, which relies on three premises: a distinction
                        between the intention of the author and the text, in the acknowledgement of
                        meaning as something that is not inherent but constructed; a circular
                        process of building understanding, which holistically considers both the
                        whole and its parts; and a dependency between text and recipient, which
                        implies a contextual and subjective reasoning process. Though they
                        acknowledge that some digital tools successfully replicate the conditions of
                        analogue hermeneutic processes, Rabea Kleymann and Jan-Erik Stange argue
                        that these essential premises are largely disregarded by tools more anchored
                        in digital methods, especially in the realm of data visualisation. In
                        response, drawing heavily on the work of  and 
                        , they propose four postulates for hermeneutic data visualisation
                        which attend to the premises. The first, Two Way Screen, refers to the
                        quality of being manipulable rather than limited to rendering. A hermeneutic
                        visualisation should not only facilitate interpretive activities, such as
                        annotation and information structuring, but display them. This bidirectional
                        interaction encourages the circular and holistic approach. The second
                        postulate, Quality, asks that data be shown as constructed and subjective,
                        as understood from the text-recipient relationship premise. This does not
                        necessarily require novel conventions, but might simply mean using standard
                        visual variables to represent interpretative dimensions like salience or
                        relatedness. Parallax, the third postulate, emphasises the importance of
                        polyvalence. Access to multiple views of an object of inquiry highlights its
                        ambiguities, and, correspondingly, interpretive possibilities. The aim of
                        Parallax is to deliberately engender uncertainty and doubt, which stands in
                        stark contrast to the Tuftian conception of the purpose of visualisation as
                        being to reveal the truth of data  — the not a —
                        that dominates CS visualisation . The final postulate,
                        Discourse, is focused on the back and forth between visualisation and
                        interpreter in the construction of argument and is particularly interested
                        in forefronting the influence of the digital representation on the way in
                        which the argument is constructed. In practice, this may look like the kind
                        of visualisation and written interpretation pairing facilitated by
                        Luxembourg DTU’s Lumy interface.
                    While Kleymann and Stange focus on bidirectionality and polyvalence, others
                        insist that transparency is central to supporting interpretation  ; inputs, procedures, and results must evidently be
                        interpretable in order to be interpreted. Transparency, in this case, is not
                        the transparency of eyeglasses, where the aim is for transparency to be
                        synonymous with invisibility — the kind of transparency which, as mentioned,
                        is prevalent in computational interfaces  — but the
                        transparency of a skeleton watch, where the point is to expose the inner
                        workings. Exposing the guts of the process is the central premise of
                        CLAIRON, a natural language database interface (NLIDB) for the theatrical
                        data of the Comédie-Française Registers Project . Like other
                        tools in this class, CLAIRON does natural language question-to-query (SQL)
                        translation, displaying the result of the latter. However, unlike other
                        NLIDBs, it exposes each step of the translation process to the user in an
                        effort to get them to engage with the human to machine translation whose
                        complexities and necessary compromises are at the heart of enacting a more
                        humanistic style of computing . Question-query
                        highlight correspondence shows users how each of their questions is
                        reformulated for execution, which may not match their initial conception,
                        encouraging critical reflection on their intention. Users can directly
                        modify queries that are produced, which are accessible through an
                        interactive log, or even write queries from scratch, which facilitates the
                        circularity evoked by Kleymann and Stange and reflects the dialogic nature
                        of humanistic inquiry. The process of entity matching and disambiguation
                        (establishing a correspondence between question terms and database entitles
                        and selecting between entities of the same name) is explicated through a
                        series of visualisations, including notation for when foreign keys or
                        calculated fields are used, and a series of successive query and expression
                        trees show how linguistic dependencies and keywords are used to produce the
                        query (e.g. implied negation, aggregation, ordering etc.). Notably, the
                        design of CLAIRON makes no attempt to take on implicit interpretation. If
                        asked for the best of Molière’s plays, the interface returns an error
                        message saying that it does not understand the meaning of best; however,
                        questions about the most profitable or most frequently performed plays are
                        translated and executed without issue. This feature forces users to confront
                        their assumptions, which draws attention to the contextual and subjective
                        nature of interpretive knowledge construction.
                    There exists a prevalent assumption in DH that if the computer is to be
                        useful to the humanist, its efficacy must necessarily lie in the aptness of
                        the scientific metaphor for humanistic study . However,
                        regardless of how closely a humanistic object of study can be made to
                        resemble a scientific problem, the ways in which disciplines seek to
                        interact with it remain different. The aim of digital hermeneutics, as
                        illustrated by tools such as kiara/Lumy and CLAIRON,
                        is to establish new conventions of design and use which leverage the kind of
                        interrogations made possible by digital transformation but which also make
                        explicit sites of interpretation born of this transformation and include
                        mechanisms for manipulation and reflection to support interpretive
                        activity.
                    During her time as Artist in Residence at CERN, Su Wen-Chei observed that,
                        when faced with a complex problem, the scientists would split into two
                        groups, each of which would individually derive an answer; if the two
                        solutions matched, the solution was considered to be correct. When she later
                        related her experience in a workshop, one artist-participant pointed out
                        that, were the same procedure followed with two groups of artists, if they
                        arrived at the same answer, the conclusion would be not that the solution
                        was correct, but that the question was wrong . These
                        interactions exemplify the different positions interpretation occupies in
                        knowledge production across disciplines and the assumptions underpinning
                        them. In the sciences, there is a notion of a single correct solution and,
                        correspondingly, and implicit aim of consensus. The primary interest lies in
                        arriving at a solution, at which point the process of interpretation leading
                        to it is considered tacit. In the arts, on the other hand — which are
                        epistemologically closer, in this respect, to the humanities — the interest
                        lies in the development and comparison of different interpretations. DH
                        exists at the crossroads of a strong hermeneutic tradition and one which is
                        doing its best to fade away. The explicit interpretation central to
                        humanistic scholarship is challenged by the implicit interpretation of
                        computational artefacts which presume to embody it. At the same time,
                        interpretive methodologies, based as they are in intuition and perspective
                        rather than formal shared language, are difficult to precisely specify,
                        making their use in concert with computation challenging. In order to
                        reconcile these traditions and undertake knowledge production that is valid
                        under both, it is essential to attend to their respective understandings of
                        the role of interpretation and the assumptions which permit these
                        framings.
                
            

                Conclusion
                The first wave of DH introduced humanities scholars to the potential of
                    high-level quantitative computational techniques. As they transform their
                    objects of inquiry and methodologies to be amenable to distant rather than close
                    reading, there are aspects which are de-emphasised — made negative — as others
                    come to the forefront.
                Second wave DH saw a renewed focus on the qualitative, with a particular emphasis
                    on the experiential and affective, both of which are rooted in the notion of
                    positionality. This reorientation toward the Humanities’ core methodological
                    strengths , most notably its attention to complexity, depth, and
                    context, begs the question of how these might be preserved, integrated, and
                    re-imagined for computational work, given its often divergent priorities and
                    assumptions.
                The still speculative third wave  pushes for increased attention to
                    the organizing logic that underlies our work  and the ways in
                    which it may stand in opposition to the values and interests of the field. This
                    demands interrogating our interactions with machines on multiple levels of
                    abstraction — notably considering the extent to which they are used in addition
                    to and instead of human intervention as well as how our ideas are transformed
                    through their use, as a function of the affordances and limitations of the
                    computational medium.
                Throughout it all, the validity of DH scholarship has been challenged from both
                    sides over questions of interpretation and its role in knowledge creation.
                Successive developments in the field have introduced new challenges and questions
                    brought about by the integration of humanistic and computational theories and
                    methodologies. What is clear is that DH is doing computing in a way that is
                    different to how it is understood in CS. It is not merely a question of content
                    but of epistemology; computing is used for theory generation and creativity more
                    so than confirmation and generalisation, for enhancing complexity rather than
                    reducing it, for exploring the interplay of — rather than sharply delineating
                    between — the mechanical and the embodied and the rational and emotional.
                DH, however, lacks a dedicated computing curriculum that attends to these
                    differences. That said, the development of one is not necessarily of interest to
                    the community. Given the number of topics and methodologies involved, the
                    difficulty of defining itself has been a constant of the field; this
                    ever-evolving nature coupled with the rapid pace of technological development
                    should make us wary of efforts to encapsulate Humanities Computing into a list
                    of acceptable perspectives and methods that are supposed to have any
                    universality or permanence . The breadth and
                    variation of DH is its strength, and the success of shared teaching endeavours
                    in DH rests upon accommodating th[e] wonderful variation and richness and
                    situatedness  inherent to the discipline and its
                    instructors.
                The facets are envisaged as a curricular middle ground. They do not prescribe any
                    specific set of technologies, topics, or competencies, but can serve as a
                    theoretical anchor for the development of a humanistic approach to computational
                    work — for instance as a scaffold to construction and analysis activities or a
                    framework for curriculum design.
                Finally, Computer Science, especially in higher education, is epistemologically
                    closed , which has been linked to its lack of diversity and
                    argued to be a weakness of the discipline with respect to preparing its students
                    for the complex ways in which computing is embedded in society .
                    Though designed with DH in mind, the facets framework could potentially also be
                    of use in CS — in particular to those working in the areas of CS4All, computing
                    for non-majors, or critically conscious computing — in helping to introduce and
                    explore the potential of alternative ways of viewing and understanding the act
                    of doing computing and its role in society .
            

                Acknowledgements
                Thank you to Professor Quintin Cutts for his thoughtful supervision and eagle
                    eyes!
            
