Title:  Whence Feminism? Assessing Feminist Interventions in Digital Literary
          Archives
Volume:  007
Issue:  1
Date:  1 July 2013
Abstract:  
        
        This essay is a meditation on the possibility of a feminist assessment of digital
          literary archives and the interdisciplinary tools needed to do such work. Using the Women
          Writers Project and The Orlando Project as exemplary instances of digital literary
          scholarship, I discuss possible sites of feminist intervention (content, technological
          politics, labor structures,etc) and the kinds of theoretical paradigms one might use in
          such work. I also argue that such assessments are essential to recognizing the ways in
          which feminist digital literary studies have impacted the field of digital humanities. 
         Drawing on recent work in technology studies and feminist theory, the essay
          problematizes simplistic celebratory claims and troubles the idea that simply saving
          women’s work in digital form is enough. I conclude with a set of reflections on the impact
          of shifting ideas about the value of feminist work and theory in both public and scholarly
          contexts. This includes a proposal that more established scholars proactively highlight
          the feminist interventions that they make and that all digital literary scholars consider
          increasing access to not only the work of women, but to the technologies that are integral
          to that access as well.
      
Full Body Text: 
Whence Feminism? Assessing Feminist Interventions in Digital Literary Archives
In 2011, I presented a paper titled Encoding Women: Are Digital
          Archives Feminist? at the Renaissance Society of American conference in Montreal.
        Among other things, I argued for a recollection of the feminist effects of many digital
        humanities methodologies — including the much-lauded cooperative or collaborative project.
        One of the audience members asked me why we should consider such practices to be distinctly
        feminist, as opposed to part of a more general liberatory ethic that derives as much
        from the civil rights movement and cultural studies as anything else. I was troubled by the
        question, but not entirely sure why. I have come to see that his question supposes that
        digital tools and methods can be either (narrowly) feminist or more generally
          liberatory, but not both. It also suggests that the ethical and political agendas of
        feminisms cannot encompass concerns with race, class, or sexuality — something that runs
        completely counter to the work of most third-wave feminists and theories of
        intersectionality. Finally, by suggesting that I had to write a history that was either
        feminist or more general, his question encouraged a dangerous kind of
        appropriation, one that incorporates many of the insights and practices of various feminisms
        but strips out their identification as such, thereby eliding the many ways in which
        feminists and feminist paradigms have effected change. This growing invisibility is
        something with which I have grown increasingly concerned, as it seems to me that the
        salutary work of feminist scholarship has been systematically subsumed under some other —
        any other — banner. Not only does this make the work of scholarly feminism invisible, once
        again writing women out of history, it also creates a vision of 21st-century feminism as
        what is left over, what has not been claimed by other now mainstream methodologies, merely
        the hysterical rantings of angry women (again). 
Over the course of a couple of years now, I’ve worked to find a methodology that would
        allow me to answer the question that motivated that 2011 paper — can we describe digital
        archives as feminist? — and have consistently run into problems. Where should I look to find
        evidence of feminist engagement when considering digital archives? What metrics should be
        applied to measure the degree of feminism embodied by a digital archive, and what is the
        subject of that measurement? Are digital archives feminist because the content is by women,
        or because the modes of production are feminist, or because the technologies themselves are
        feminist or used to feminist ends? Is it all three? Do we have to account for both the
        historical and social contexts from which particular archives arise when thinking about the
        nature of their feminism? What tools might be helpful in thinking through the sense that
        tools like XML are neutral? These are important questions not only because the answers
        enable a feminist critique of what have become cornerstones of digital humanities and
        literary work — digital archives — but also because the answers may help clarify the nature
        of the impact of feminism on digital humanities work. 
Within literary studies of the past, the major locus of feminist intervention was a text or
        set of texts, initially in the text itself and then also in its
        materiality and historical context. Such work provides models for thinking through text
        technologies, social conditions of reading and writing in print media, and rhetorical
        analysis, but not for working with digital media or with the large archive. Scholarship on
        brick and mortar archives offers models for thinking through collection building practices,
        information management, and certain kinds of access. To find models for assessing the
        hardware, software, and usage practices that are central to digital literary archives I had
        to turn to work within Science and Technology Studies, Media Studies, and feminist theorists
        of technology. This is the future of digital literary studies work — a complicated but
        necessary traversal of multiple disciplinary zones. Work in the history of the book has
        reminded literary scholars that we cannot ignore the social and material history of a text,
        an insight no less true when those texts are digital. Rather than answer the question that
        launched me on this project, what I’ll be doing here is attempting to sketch out the
        possible methodological terrain — answering not are these digital archives feminist?
        but how might we understand the feminisms of digital literary archives? Much of this
        essay can speak to issues around digital archives generally, but my focus is particularly on
        literary archives and implications for literary studies. There is a historical reason for
        this — both Orlando and WWO arose out of needs articulated by literary scholars for access
        to the work of women writers and to their histories. They were imagined as critical
        interventions in the way literature is taught and studied, and, indeed, many scholars and
        students use these and other digital archives as their primary sources for women’s writing.
        Thus, to understand the feminisms of digital literary archives is to understand how feminist
        theory and digital practices are critical contexts for literary scholarship, whether digital
        or analog, in the 21st century.

        Work by Women
        Content is perhaps the easiest place to begin, especially when the test cases are the
          Orlando Project and WWO. Both projects began as efforts by feminist literary scholars to
          address the gaps in literary history that persisted in the 1980s. The cofounders of
          Orlando, Susan Brown, Patricia Clements, and Isobel Grundy, saw the potential of the new electronic medium as a powerful
          counter-agent to the ongoing marginalization of women’s writing . Likewise, to the founders of Women Writers Online 
            the electronic archive seemed like the ideal
              successor to the physical archive, since it promised to overcome the problems of
              inaccessibility and scarcity which had rendered women’s writing invisible for so
              long
            
          . Recovery of women’s work to visible archives has long been a goal of feminist
          literary scholars and is critical to how many understand WWO and Orlando as feminist. One
          can still read exuberant celebrations of abundance and presence in analyses of the two
          projects. Take, for example, Susan Fraiman’s excitement at a potentially infinite
          electronic list of 
            history-making women
            
           or the impulse expressed in Anne Lake Prescott and Betty Travitsky’s article on
          editing women to edit everything available and use the Internet as an infinitely
          expandable archival space . In such narratives,
          digital archives are tirelessly
            productive and grand
          operations that fulfill feminist desires simply by creating a massive storage and
          retrieval mechanism for a plurality, perhaps even the totality, of women writers . In these kinds of stories, digital tools are
          imagined as leveling the production and preservation playing field. Yet, such stories also
          draw on an old hope for the resurrection of the mythical Alexandrian archive in a new
          digital form and with it a more accurate or complete literary history. If only we could
          accurately capture all the work of marginalized groups, then we could have a complete view
          of our literary past, or so such arguments seem to suggest. See also Margaret
            Ezell’s argument that while we can, theoretically, publish what we please, we still do
            not due to selective pressures .  From this
          perspective, an archive could be understood as feminist to the degree that it participated
          in this recovery effort. But the emphasis on familiar patriarchal tropes of size, mastery,
          and comprehensive collection trouble this relatively easy approach. To what degree is what
          Ellen Rooney has called the additive
            approach — where recovery is an endless process of just adding to the list of
          recognized women writers — actually making women’s work a visible, central part of
          literary history ?  See Alex Juhasz’s discussion
            of the challenges and pleasures of this kind of plentitude .
           Perhaps a feminist analysis should be suspicious of any project where bigger is
          better? Should feminist interventions block the avalanche of undifferentiated data
          suggested by the impulse to collect everything? Is mere presence — the fact of being
          there, of having women’s work exist in digital archives — enough to address the continued
          marginalization of women’s writing?
        In a moment where so many texts are available, sometimes through multiple sources, we
          need digital archives to help users discover and make sense of women’s writing. Rooney’s
          critique suggests that presence — the fact of being archived somewhere — is not enough.
          Editing everything won’t get move us much further along in the effort to end oppression of
          women if we don’t use those editorial opportunities to recenter the role of women’s
          writing in historical and contemporary debates about gender, sex, ethics, and the social
          dynamics of power. Reading the celebratory rhetoric around digital projects such as
          Orlando and WWO suggests that a feminist recovery project is also about size; the
          excitement around the digital was and sometimes still is about an infinite scale. It seems
          absurd, however, to suggest that there might be a scale of feminism that maps onto the
          size of an archive (the bigger the archive, the more feminist it is?). In fact, a
          celebration of plentitude reproduces certain commercial metrics — notably production as
          value and information as capital — of which there is significant feminist critique.
            See for example .  The images of a tirelessly productive and grand archive are themselves haunted by
          gendered subject positions: the productive woman, valuable so long as
          she is endlessly bearing fruit, and the grand monument, the size of
          which is an index of its value. Amy Earhart’s discussion of the troubling ways that NEH
          measures impact suggests that a monumental logic is at work not just
          in celebrations of archives, but also in the funding practices that enable most digital
          projects .
        Consequently, I might look for a feminist archive to facilitate access by helping users
          sort through an abundance of data and push against monumentalism in some way. In a
          co-authored piece on the WWO, Julia Flanders and I used facilitation of access in
          precisely this way as we argued that 
            WWO, and digital collections like
              it, offer the literary scholar an example of an archive that exceeds the project of
                mere recovery. The ability of digital technologies to offer
              information about genre and form, while also enabling the blurring of generic
              boundaries, positions such archives as both repositories and sites of
              translation
            
          . In that same piece we argued that the blurring of boundaries enabled by
          interpretive markup 
            exemplif[ies] the insights of
              feminist literary critiques.
            
          . What is at stake here is access not only to the texts, but also to the
          intellectual paradigms that situate women’s writing as transformational with respect to
          canon and as central models of textual genres. Access, as a way of sorting through data,
          is also a way of valuing texts. Perhaps, then, I could use a metric that balances presence
          and access to assess digital archives. But how, I wondered, should I think through the
          value of plenty and that of particularity in feminist terms? 
        Even as people continue to laud the expansive possibilities of the Internet as literary
          archive, we also hear laments at the loss of early digital literary projects — a different
          layer of content. Earhart, for example, sounds alarm at the loss of
          many of the recovery projects of the late 20th century. For her, these projects manifest
          an early sense that 
            digital literary scholarship [was] a tool
              that might be utilized to meet the theoretical demands of scholarly work that
              reinserted women, people of color, and queers into the canon
            
          . These early projects then were evidence of the ways in which digital tools enabled
          feminist scholarship. Earhart offers a nuanced analysis of why such projects are
          disappearing, pointing to economic issues (electronic editions are expensive), structural
          problems with activist scholarship (when the scholar leaves, does her archive go too? who
          shepherds these projects?), and infrastructural issues that place the work of individual
          scholars at greater risk than those working in larger DH centers or programs. We might
          read each of these causes as symptomatic of a larger resistance to cultural studies constructions that Earhart
          (like Alan Liu and Martha Nell Smith) posits within digital humanities practice more
          generally . See , , and .   In which case, there is
          a kind of repetition of the canon wars subtly at work in digital literary studies, and
          indeed, this is the point of Earhart’s argument — that patriarchal habits of assessment,
          value, and quality continue to support a New Critical canon within
          the supposedly gender-neutral circuits and networks at the heart of digital humanities. A
          feminist response to such resistance and loss might be the kind of
            individual action that Earhart suggests can help to recover the
          recovery project, developing short-term storage solutions for projects that threaten to
          melt back into oblivion.
        Not only would such collection represent a continuation of the feminist recovery effort,
          it might also represent the kind of feminist preservation of process — scholarly or
          otherwise — described by Alex Juhasz. Such a model takes plentitude not as the sign of a
          monumental logic, but as a feminist response to the elisions at the heart of sorting and
          editing. In her work on the film archive at the Los Angeles Women’s Building, Juhasz reads
          a potentially overwhelming record of everything (daily conversation, group work, leisurely
          tours of the space) as a critical feminist response to the elisions performed when a
          documentary filmmaker selects and edit the raw material to produce a
          product. In her reading, the collection of everything creates an archive of process, a material manifestation of a 
            theory and practice for being seen and
              remembered
            
          . Juhasz’s essay reads the archive of process as a deliberate refutation of the
          aestheticized, linear, patriarchal narrative characteristic of other documentary film
          production. The oversized archive is a record of feminist engagement with technologies —
          here film — and it seems to me that the preservation envisioned by Earhart’s call to save
          the early recovery projects could function as a kind of archive of feminist literary
          engagement with early web technologies. In some ways this addresses the problems
          identified by Rooney: rather than understanding the proliferation of recovery projects and
          their contents as an endless list, we might see them as representations of a particular
          historical moment in feminist engagements with technology. We might read the volume as
          indexical, pointing to the ongoing struggle to give voice to women’s work and to develop
          methodologies adequate to the challenges of feminist theories. While revaluing process may
          help us think through the work of recovery differently, thereby shifting emphasis away
          from metrics aligned with patriarchal and corporate production and the spare, elegant end
          product, there remain a number of challenges. The burden of plenty and its encounter with
          mortal limits is real — it’s important to think through the kinds of archives we are
          leaving for those who come after us, and if that archive cannot be read, cannot be seen,
          cannot be processed because it is simply too large and undifferentiated then we risk
          burying our subjects in a new way. The Woman’s Building for Juhasz represents precisely
          this kind of challenge to human constraints; the collection is outsized. What balance, then, between both kinds of
          presence — process and works — should we seek? When should we push for access to volume or
          to detail and particularity? Can feminist scholarship partake of both big data and small
          digital worlds? What balance might I hope for between tactical ephemerality and strategic
          monumentality?
        My discussion assumes a feminist assessment of presence and access that pertains to
          women’s writing. However, the issue of data overload is hardly unique to feminist archives
          or feminist scholarship. Is this then an issue of medium, rather than of feminism? Is it
          possible to differentiate in this way? Tara McPherson, quoting Marsha Kinder, has
          suggested that such a partitioning of media and ideology is in fact problematic, a cyberstructuralist approach that disavows
          feminism, critical race studies, and other forms of politicized inquiry . McPherson’s argument suggests that if presence and
          access are intertwined features when we are talking about women’s writing, they must also
          be equally intertwined in the preservation and representation of men’s work. While men’s
          writing does not suffer the same dearth of presence, it is equally important to consider
          the operations of the privilege of presence. Recognizing the ways that men’s writing is
          everywhere present and appears not to need the same level of critical intervention in
          order to be understood as valuable might be a clue to why structuralism and
          cyberstructuralism have seemed so hospitable to the study of male authors, but less so to
          women’s work. That we seem not to need an intervention to understand or value men’s work
          bears reiteration as we continue to build digital collections. My suggestion that we
          assess archives in terms of presence and absence is also a reminder that women’s writing
          is not exceptional in being shaped by these forces; we can and should denaturalize the
          familiarity of men’s writing in engagements with digital tools and methods. 
         It had seemed to me that content was an easy place to start talking about how to
          understand feminism and digital archives, but I have found that it is actually rather
          murky terrain. While the presence of women’s work seems like a common sense measure of
          feminist content, the intertwining of presence and access draws attention to the losses
          incurred if we extricate the content from its media form or from its social discursive
          contexts. This is not new. Feminist histories and theories of technology have taken
          account of the technosocial context for some time. Additionally,
            intersectionality as a critical term that speaks not just to the
          experience of power over subjects, but also to the media expressions of power, and should
          have suggested to me that looking at content alone would be problematic from the outset.
        
      

        Power Tools
         Perhaps, then, a turn to a different look at the politics of digital work, as the power relations expressed in the tools
          themselves . Digital archives unite two historically
          gendered fields — computer and archival sciences. Literary scholars who depend on archival
          or rare book materials still confront, whether they acknowledge it or not, the legacy of
          an institutional form through which patriarchal power exercised the authority to determine
          value, classification, and access. A struggle made all the more important by the
          transmutation of archival materials into historical fact by scholarly alchemy.  On
            archival tacit narratives and the
            building of scholarly fact see .  While digital
          archives were envisioned as the answer to women’s exclusion from the power relations that
          constituted literary archives, we have yet to parse the relationships between gender and
          the tools central to digital archives. I, myself, have excitedly proposed reading XML and
          SGML as political rather than neutral tools. I turned to feminist scholars of technology
          in search of the right frame for thinking through how data modeling, interpretive markup,
          or the recording of paratextual information might represent gendered information
          structures. Unfortunately, I found that utilizing a broad feminist theory of technology
          threatens to widen the scope too far — to leave behind the valuable local context or
          technological specificity. Judy Wajcmann’s suggestion that technological developments have
          historically been gendered male and consumption has been gendered female works as a
          generalization about industrial and early post-industrial technologies.  For a
            helpful summary of this see .  But it seems a bit too
          easy to suggest that a simple men-create/women-use paradigm is still at work in
          21st-century feminist archives like WWO and Orlando, where women are clearly doing a great
          deal of creating. It also felt imprecise to suggest that manufacturing and data modeling
          operated under the same gendering logic — although McPherson’s analysis of UNIX suggests
          that there are logical paradigms that enable and operate through technological development
          so pervasively that such comparisons may be worthwhile. 
        At the same time, it is precisely in the specialized technologies of digital humanities —
          computer science in particular — that we continue to see a distinct gendering of work and
          product, as well as a significant gender gap in participation. As Bianco and others have
          noted, there has been a 29% drop since 1984 in the number of women computer science majors
            . Responding to a panel on Feminist
            Technologies, Cathy Davidson spoke at the 2012 Society for the Social Studies of Science
            about the precipitous fall in women majoring in computer science at the undergraduate
            level (down 80% over the last ten years).  Things have gotten worse, not better,
          when it comes to women’s participation in computer science fields. This suggests that
          there is indeed a gendered separation of those who can make with computational tools and
          those who consume. As important as participation parity is, it is only one part of the way
          that we can theorize the gendering of technology — we should also be thinking in terms of
          gendered structures and logics. Pointing to the excellent women working within digital
          humanities, including the women who code, markup, and build the Orlando Project and WWO,
          misses the point. Part of the useful insight of McPherson’s analysis is that the power
          operations imbedded in certain technologies and their habitual use are not the result of
          willful user sexism or racism. It’s not that UNIX developers themselves worked to
          sequester race, but rather that that our difficulty talking about race and digital media
          is an effect of the very designs of our
            technological systems, the modularity and spare aesthetics of which work to 
            cordon off race
            
          . Similarly, the logic of the maker/consumer paradigm is a gendering one regardless
          of the sex or intentions of the participants. Consequently, those who cannot make find
          themselves in subordinated, devalued, user positions that deny agency
          and expertise (and funding!). As the work of Alan Liu and Martha Nell Smith suggests,
          developers/designers who foreground design standards that emphasize modularity and a spare
          visual interface are creating docile or unchallenged readers.
            See footnote 11.  Just as an author creates his or her ideal reader, those who
          make digital literary projects are making particular kinds of users — users who are
          imagined, more often than not, as welcoming an unchallenging, clean
          experience that facilitates comfortable and easy interaction. However
            open,
          collaborative, and connected Digital Humanities
          purports to be, if computational tools are wielded in ways that continue old patriarchal
          privileges of expertise and authority and create merely receptive users, then we miss an
          opportunity to leverage digital tools to transform literary scholarship in meaningful
            ways. These are the terms highlighted in Lisa Spiro’s value statement for DH in
              . 
        
        Let me offer an example from the Orlando Project that can shed some light on how to
          understand certain kinds of tools and their public presentation as transformative, even if
          it creates an abundance of information and a technical challenge to the user. Document
          Type Definitions (DTD) are expressions of rules. They define the structure of related XML
          or SGML documents and articulate the set of allowable elements and attributes. They are
          essential to the kind of publication that both the Orlando Project and the WWO provide. It
          is possible to read a DTD as an expression of fact or scholarly opinion; something like
            this is the set of categories and relationships that hold for these texts. I
          would argue, in fact, that this is precisely what happens when a DTD operates silently and
          invisibly for users. But, the public DTD can be read as generative, as productive of a
          model of the text, but not the sole or authoritative model, in which case it becomes
          visible as feminist intervention. Orlando project directors suggest that they use markup
          to encode a text that does not currently exist, which is to say that their texts
          are born digital and structural markup like p is part of the formation of the
          scholarly entry itself. Each entry is a newly authored digital text, and the structural
          markup does not refer to the presence of a particular feature in a source text (unlike
          much of what appears in WWO).
             On performative vs declarative markup see , , , .
           However, the picture is more complicated than just a DTD that establishes the
          parameters for the creation of secondary, scholarly texts. Orlando also uses a set of DTDs
          for interpretive markup, like that of the Writing DTD, that can be read as paratextual
          with respect to the absent primary texts — the literary texts written by women that
          Orlando articles discuss. Consequently, we can see this markup as generating a feminist
          and materialist hermeneutic space through which a reading of primary texts is enabled. 
        Within the Writing DTD, a production semantic grouping locates the text in terms
          of thirty tags, which include designations of print scope (press run, circulation, type
          and location of press), media type, and print related interactions (rejections and
          relationship to printer). Thus, the primary texts are presented as artifacts of a
          publishing world, in which meaning is mediated by particular material and social
          conditions. The textual features semantic collection, on the other hand, defines
          the texts in terms of literary analysis, genre, plot, character, etc. These are clearly
          not natural categories and their use provides productive limits for both searching and
          subsequent reading. For example, a chronological query for Feminist within the
          genre tagset (identifying a text, rather than as a person) produces a timeline that begins
          with a 1589 feminist polemic by Jane Anger and a late 1660’s
            proto-feminist treatise by Mary More. What does a retroactive genre
          designation, such as feminist, do to or for a 16th- or 17th-century
          text? In the terms laid out here, such paratextual identification generates a literary
          historical world in which feminist discourse and writing practice antedates the beginning
          of feminist political/social movements by two centuries. Orlando documentation argues that
          beyond simply structuring the secondary texts, the markup offers myriad new ways to probe women’s literary history,
          allowing a reader to explore the argument that the history of writing in the service of
          women’s rights and equality is a long one . Rather than taking each
          historical narrative expressed by the DTD as declarative, I am suggesting that we
          understand them as creating speculative historical narratives that offer new ways of
          reading women’s texts. While this is not how the Orlando project authors have articulated
          the nature of their feminist interventions, the publication of the DTD enables a reader to
          see the craftedness of the archive and to imagine alternative interventions. If read as
          expressions of scholarly fact, Orlando’s new ways of navigating history seem
          constrained by processes of production and appear to reproduce some of the failings of
          older archival models. When the encoding is read as generative, however, the archive
          becomes a paratextual machine that enables users to contextualize and read primary texts.
          This is an important shift in the transactional nature of the paratext, which now is
          directed back at the reader herself or between communities of readers. 
        There is another way to think about a gendered genealogy for the technologies of digital
          literary archives like the WWO. Thinking of content not qua
          content, but as a testbed for digital humanities tools and technology
          research offers a different way to think about hitherto invisible effects of gender in
          tool making. NEH grants do not primarily fund the expansion of the WWO collection, but
          rather the development of new encoding practices, interfaces, or tools. Applying for these
          particular grants is a practical decision on the part of the WWP staff that accounts for
          different cost sharing models for different kinds of externally funded work (another site
          of institutional effects). Thus women’s writing is the testbed for
          digital development, rather than the subject of development itself. Is there an impact on
          technological development when the test cases are exclusively the writing of women? I
          would argue that there is, although the particular effects deserve essays of their own. In
          some ways this makes women’s work absolutely integral to the history of WWO technologies.
          Given the profile of the WWP within DH, this might suggest that women’s work lay at the
          heart of digital humanities. Yet, the case of Henrietta Lacks, whose cells were the
          unacknowledged source of the immortal cell line used in biomedical
          research, points to the ways in which a source may be both fundamental and silenced . Nevertheless, women’s writing-as-testbed suggests that the
          experimental subject might be a locus of feminist intervention. Such a relationship also
          raises the possibility that there might be a feminist basis for tools and methods, even if
          those are not themselves feminist. As important as it is to not silence the effects of
          women’s work and feminist motivations, this scenario raises a difficult question: While a
          historical analysis might uncover such political origins, would we then say that the tools
          were in fact feminist? What if they were deployed in anti-feminist work?
      

        The Technosocial Scene and Visible Feminism
        Writing gender-aware histories of digital literary studies and the use of digital tools
          therein will certainly begin to address how and where we might locate feminist ideology
          and politics within digital archives. The histories of technologies are always social
          histories, and feminist scholars of technology have emphasized the need to account for the
          technosocial scene — the complex network of relations between institutions, participants,
          funding entities, etc. Bianco describes this scene simply as the politics of DH . It
          strikes me that while computing is obviously a significant part of digital literary
          scholarship, such work is not the same as computer science, nor are individual digital
          archival projects going to have the same local contexts. It seems to me that what is
          needed for a social history, and therefore a more complete theory of technology in digital
          literary studies, is fine-grained study of the interactions between content, product(s),
          technologies, participants/creators, institutions (funding and academic), and users.
          Perhaps this is something akin to going back to
            the object suggested by Bruno Latour’s Actor Network Theory approach (; see also ). This is very much what
          McPherson does with her analysis of UNIX and a feminist analysis of digital literary tools
          needs similar approaches.
        A first pass at sketching the networks of authority that crisscross projects like WWO and
          Orlando helps to illuminate just how complex this work can be. The Orlando Project is
          based in the Research Institute for Women's Writing at the University of Alberta, with a
          site at the University of Guelph, and receives support from both institutions. Funding has
          also come from external granting agencies in support of collection development . For an archive of born-digital secondary texts, responsibility
          for representation lies with project directors, and authority derives in part from the
          scholarly status of those who author each entry. The project’s objective is to produce
          both the digital archive and a set of print collections . Accordingly, a traditional academic press, Cambridge University Press, owns the
          publications. Consequently, Orlando’s production history is tied to traditional print
          models of publication like those of the thematic literary history. While scholarly
          publication with a press like Cambridge confers stability, provisional permanence, and
          prestige upon Orlando, it also tucks the resource away behind paywalls. Institutions,
          consortia, and scholarly societies can pay for access on behalf of their members but open
          access is not (currently) a possibility with the Orlando archive. WWO is also a
          subscription resource, although publication happens through the project itself rather than
          with a publishing house. As a result, both archives runs the risk of falling subject to
          economic choices at individual institutions that do not value women’s work enough to
          purchase the resource. While they began with hopes for a new media that might break
          through old economic and social models, in both cases, older models of dissemination and
          collection continue to shape interactions with these digital archives. 
        WWO is the production of the Women Writers Project (WWP) and is housed at Brown
          University. While the brand recognition of a private, Ivy League institution is a certain
          kind of capital, unlike the Orlando Project, the WWP has historically received the
          majority of its funding from external grant agencies and through its cost-recovery
          subscription model for WWO. Begun as a project to address the marginalization of women’s
          writing from the canon, print, and classroom, the WWO moves women’s work closer to an
          academic center of power, while remaining at least partially economically marginalized
          from that center.  The WWP history traces a longer trajectory than I personally
            experienced, from being housed in the English department to Computing and Information
            Services, and, now, in the library. http://www.wwp.brown.edu/about/history/. For more on labor and the
            institutional position of the WWP, see .  While the
          WWO was initially conceived to address the lack of access to work by women authors,
          efforts by Google Books and EEBO to expand their digital offerings mean that many of these
          texts are available through one or both of those resources as well, although neither
          resource make search by authorial gender possible. Personal communication, Julia
            Flanders, Monday January 14th  This contextual change means that the logic of
          value for the project shifts somewhat from that of redress of simple presence/access
          issues, to redress of the kinds of access. WWO remains the single best source for full
          text access and for the study of women’s writing as such. Additionally, as an index of the
          ongoing imbalance in print editions, the WWO is critical. A recipient of significant grant
          funding, it has been marked as a worthwhile, fundable project, valuable during a period of
          24 (thus far) years during which feminist critique went from central to academic work,
          joined by cultural and ethnic studies, and then declined, most notably in the view of
          rising students.
         The scene, so to speak, includes those working as part of each project as much as it
          does the institutional and academic contexts in which they work. Both the WWO and Orlando
          depend on scholarly collaboration to create and maintain their materials. At this point in
          most digital scholarly projects, collaboration is happening between a small set of trained
          graduate students, faculty, and IT and library staff. This is often due to a complex nexus
          of concerns, including interest, scholarly expectations, expertise, and where funding and
          labor cycles are consistently available. The reliable, citable edition that was the
          initial model for so much digital literary work entails the marshalling and production of
          certain kinds of academic authority. Such authority depends upon degrees conferred and
          field expertise, which often is, paradoxically for the digital archive, predicated upon
          the experiential authority gained by time in brick and mortar archives . In some sense, the WWP and the Orlando Project embody
          collaboration as a feminist strategy; this is certainly a major part of how the Orlando
          team understands the project as a feminist intervention. The theme appears
            repeatedly in writing on the project, including in  and . For theorizations of collaboration as a feminist practice,
            see  and .  For Brown,
          Clements, Grundy, Balazs, and Antonik this has been manifest as a more
            egalitarian method of scholarship that has also addressed some of
          the very real financial pressures faced by those at the bottom of the
          field — graduate students. Both projects have included graduate students as partners in
          work, moving some way to address patriarchal models of authority that traditionally cordon
          off graduate students from real work. At the same time, the pressures
          of producing citable, teachable resources mean that these are not entirely open projects.
          Does this mean that reliable scholarly digital projects are doomed to reproduce the
          hierarchies that separate the scholar from other users? Are good digital editions and
          resources only to be had from scholars who have had access to the traditional institutions
          and resources that confer academic authority? A recent proliferation of crowd-sourced
          digital projects raises questions about academic privilege and gate keeping in digital
          literary projects. Cathy Davidson observes that while projects like NINES have opened up
          to user contribution, the issues around decentered authority remain unresolved within the digital humanities and
          academic communities . Are we keeping
          non-professional users out of production to protect both academic privilege and the status
          of the traditional archive? Should we be looking to feminist digital literary projects to
          push the possibilities of decentering even further? How might we compare a feminist
          archive that depends on the power of the doctoral degree to assure reliability with one
          that invites non-credentialed users and readers to push scholarship into a more radically
          inclusive mode? Feminist digital archives and other digital literary work clearly do not
          need to operate in a single mode — but if we are looking to assess a feminist project as
          such, how important is it that production be informed by feminist values?
        Working to include students and other young feminists strikes me as a particularly urgent
          project now at a time when students too often fail to see the relevance of either academic
          or political feminisms to their lives. Part of what is at stake for students is their own
          sense of agency — it is not always clear how they might intervene in an academic context
          where traditional hierarchies still largely dictate what counts as good or useful
          scholarship. There are good reasons for digital literary projects to want to claim certain
          kinds of authority and relevance; they are the currency of academic value. These
          motivations, however, are in tension with feminist calls for a more decentered model of
          authority — one that eschews that knowledge is only valuable when dispensed by a
          credentialed elite. Perhaps a model of constructive or transformative authority — the
          authority developed by a student as she or he engages in synthetic or creative analysis —
          can be a helpful guide for thinking about the kinds of authority expressed through
          different scholarly outputs. See . Also
            discussed in  in response to pedagogical issues with a
            complete decentering of authority.  It strikes me that the University of
          Richmond’s History Engine (http://historyengine.richmond.edu/pages/home) is an excellent example of how to
          produce and publish the scholarly work of undergraduates, expressing precisely this kind
          of transformative authority.
        As I noted above, feminism has become worse than an irrelevance, a
          new national dirty word: a term
          that is meaningful as a warning sign, rather than as an entry point to a complex set of
          historically and geographically specific ideas and practices . See also , , and .  The shifting academic
          and social status of feminist critique is an important context because it speaks to the
          question that I discussed at the opening of this essay: why, asked that audience member,
          should we read particular tools, features, and so forth as feminist rather than more
          generally liberatory? As I suggest, his question elides the place of feminist work in the
          history of digital literary studies — appropriating the successes of feminist work for a
          more general, and more palatable, liberatory agenda. Such appropriations are, in some
          sense, an effect of feminisms’ historical trajectory from marginalization, to relative
          centrality and institutional prestige, and now into a perilous kind of irrelevance, one
          that repeatedly renders feminist interventions invisible as such. I think there are at
          least two ways that this happens. First, in a context of both real and perceived hostility
          to feminist discourse and critique, there is pressure to hide explicitly feminist agendas.
          Despite the evidence of successful funding of WWO and Orlando, among other feminist
          projects, I have repeatedly heard scholars suggest the NEH’s policy that it will not fund
          projects that seek to promote a particular
            political, religious, or ideological point of view…or projects that advocate a
            particular program of social action, necessitates that grant applicants mask or
          hide the feminism of their projects. This is standard language for NEH grant
            guidelines. An example can be found on page three of the Digital Humanities Start Up
            Grant information, available from the NEH web site at
            http://www.neh.gov/files/grants/digital-humanities-start-sept-2011.pdf  Do such
          recommendations arise from sour grapes over past failures to secure funding? Perhaps. But
          such assessments make up the social ecology in which digital archives exist and, valid or
          no, they echo similar experiences in print culture. Take, for example, Jack Halberstam’s
          experience with editors for the book Gaga Feminism, who
          suggested that he remove the word feminism in order to get published. There is a
          sense that feminism is a dirty word for more than just our students and that there
          is good reason to cloak feminist work in other language, even at the risk of losing the
          history of that work.
        The second path to invisibility is perhaps less sinister, but equally harmful to efforts
          to bring a new generation of students into feminist engagement. I have had a number of
          conversations with feminists who are a generation or two older than I am over the last
          year and I have been struck by the ways in which many of them talk about their feminist
          work as a fundamental, if not always visible, component of their current scholarship. This
          has taken a couple of different forms, from I’ve moved to different topics but the
            issues are still central to my work to its all there, I just don’t call it that
            anymore. It is great to hear that various feminisms are cooked into everything these
          women do; but it is also a little terrifying. A cooked in feminism is visible in the way
          that nutmeg is in a cookie — if you’re looking, you’ll find it. If you’re not looking or,
          as is the case for many students, you don’t know how to look for it, you’re eating just
          another delicious (or perhaps just palatable) cookie. A hidden feminism may leave us in a
          contemporary context where it seems plausible that our tools and methods are all operating
          out of just a general liberatory ethics, rather than being a set of practices and tools
          fundamentally linked to the work of women and feminist scholars. We are at an interesting
          moment for scholarly and public feminism, one in which older power paradigms have shifted,
          perhaps making the operations of oppression a bit more difficult to see. At the same time,
          activism and certain ethical positions have become more central to academic and public
          thought (perhaps also rendering them less radical). While it is a hard moment to ask
            where/how feminism?, it seems especially critical if we are to see the real
          effects of women’s work in contemporary culture and productively trouble the sense that we
          are in some kind of post-feminist moment.
      

        Conclusion: Opening Out
        I began this project hoping to offer a critical analysis of the Orlando Project and the
          WWO as feminist digital literary archives. My goal was an assessment of both projects, in
          particular their technical tools, in feminist terms. Instead, I have written a meditation
          on the challenges of such a project and included some initial gestures toward the
          extensive work entailed. I would like to conclude not with a judgment of either project,
          but a kind of wish for the future that has developed as I have been working on this
          project. Bianco endorses a range of digital,
            creative critical interactions in her This Digital
            Humanities Which is Not One and I would like to suggest that the facilitation of
          such interactions is crucial for ongoing feminist work in digital literary
          studies. Interaction resonates with the ongoing emphasis on
          collaboration in the field, but it also suggests the use or inhabiting of the space
          between actions — between use and
            creation/making, or between making and
            theorizing. As thresholds, digital archives
          are complex negotiations of the spaces between thing and theory —
          where thing signifies both the media through which a user interfaces
          and the material object being represented or reproduced . I would add that digital archives are also thresholds between actions. That
            thingness and those actions are as much an experience of the user
          as they are of the encoder, programmer, and editor. Finding ways to enable user engagement
          in production would allow us to more fully consider the operations of the archive and the
          ways in which it serves as a threshold. It also would embody a more radical feminist
          approach to our understanding of technology as entailing 
            interplay between designing and use, or
              between designer and user
            
          . Radical feminist digital literary studies can embrace the cyclical processes of
          interaction, leveraging rather than resisting change, and bring in a range of producers.
          Whether through crowd-sourced initiatives, interfaces that express not just the textual
          instance but the process by which that instance was developed, or critical play zones
          where small worlds can be created, there is room for greater experimentation with a more
          radical and creative model of the feminist archive. 

      
