Title:  Decolonizing 
Volume:  014
Issue:  4
Date:  15 December 2020
Abstract:  
            
            This essay explores the challenges of using the digital, both
               scholarly and pedagogically, for understanding and analyzing colonial Latin American
               art. It argues that digital art history (DAH) tools and methods offer new ways to
               think about the non-neutrality of how we access, collect, and understand information
               discovered online. Specifically, it focuses on responses to a questionnaire and the
               development of a collaborative Omeka project (involving students) to consider how
               knowledge is produced in the digital environment. It reflects on issues of digital
               and visual epistemology, digital visuality, the ontology of art history,
               accessibility, and neocolonialism, and how these topics have been broached with
               undergraduate students in a class focused on Spanish colonial art.
         
Abstract:  
            
            Este ensayo explora los desafíos de usar lo digital, tanto académica como
               pedagógicamente, para comprender y analizar el arte colonial latinoamericano.
               Sostiene que las herramientas y los métodos de la historia del arte digital (DAH)
               ofrecen nuevas formas de pensar sobre la no neutralidad de cómo accedemos,
               recopilamos, y entendemos la información descubierta en línea. Específicamente, se
               centra en las respuestas al cuestionario y en el desarrollo de un proyecto
               colaborativo Omeka (con estudiantes) para considerar cómo se produce el conocimiento
               en el entorno digital. Reflexiona sobre temas de epistemología digital y visual,
               visualidad digital, ontología de la historia del arte, accesibilidad y
               neocolonialismo, y cómo estos temas han sido abordados con estudiantes en una clase
               enfocada en el arte colonial.
         
Full Body Text: 
[D]igital media is not neutral: It impacts the represented
               information and the ways society interprets it
            .

            Introduction: Colonial Latin American Art and The Digital
            Digital visual media, such as images and videos, form an inescapable cornerstone of
               our lived experience. For those of us in higher education, the digital is altering
               not only how and what we research but also how and what we teach. In a similar vein
               as other specializations, the study of colonial Latin American art is being
                  transformed.I alternate between the terms art and visual
                     culture with full understanding that there are important differences
                  between them. For the sake of space, I do not unpack the manifold meanings of
                  either term. Art historians, finely attuned to the visual world and the
               meaning-making processes informing it, seem uniquely positioned to engage with and
               critique the digital realm that we increasingly inhabit and to teach digital, visual
               literacy.
             Despite art historians’ possible role to play in shaping and framing the digital
               world, there is still an ambivalence about what the digital turn has to offer art
               history. An assessment of the impact of the digital, and more specifically the
               digital humanities (DH) and digital art history (DAH), on the field of art history
               reveals that there are those who believe the digital turn has the potential to
               positively disrupt it (e.g., Honig 2018) and those who
               feel it has the potential to problematically disturb it (e.g., Bishop 2015). Regardless of where an individual’s
               position falls on this spectrum, the digital is here to stay, and it is reinventing
               art history and the manner in which we access, engage with, asses, and frame visual
               culture. One wonders, as Nuria Rodríguez-Ortega (2013b) has, if Donald Preziosi (1991)
               could have imagined the impact the digital would have on how we rethink art history, a suggestion he first made about the art-historical
               discipline in the wake of post-structuralist and post-modern critiques of art and the
               (im)possibility of stable meaning.
            For all these reasons, it is important that we equip ourselves with the ability to
               understand how the digital frames or reframes our understanding of visual culture and
               to effectively critique it. As art historians know all too well, framing devices
               construct a visual rhetoric, one that creates certain epistemological and methodological assumptions, in the words of Elli
               Doulkaridou [2015, 69]. Something as seemingly
               simple as substituting, in class, a high-resolution gigapixel panoramic 360° photo of
               the church of San Pablo de Ocongate in Peru  for a flat
               megapixel one can alter perception, experience, and belief about the object or space
               that the digital image indexes. The digital turn has thus prompted shifts in how we
               see the world and the ways in which we consume and produce knowledge. In the digital
               environment in which we increasingly live, learn, and, for those of us in the
               classroom, teach, it has become clear that we must consider digital technology as
               epistemology 
               . Digital media is, as Yehuda Kalay states, not
               neutral, but creates, shapes, and disseminates knowledge in different ways than a
               hardbound book, a DVD, or a lecture delivered in a classroom. Similarly,
               Rodríguez-Ortega advises us to be mindful about how we perceive of the digital realm
               — not as a neutral, innocuous space that delivers
                  information but as a cultural, political, and
                  ideological venue
               .See also Rodríguez-Ortega
                  2018.
            
            For these reasons it is imperative to think about not only the technological tools
               needed to engage in digital practices and meaning-making, but also the critical tools
               needed to think about what content to produce and how to produce it. I would add to
               this that we also need the critical tools to think about, assess, and communicate
               what and how we experience and interact with (i.e. what we consume) online. Even
               those of us who do not intend to make DAH tools or projects will encounter and use
               them, and most if not all art historians now employ digitized images for our teaching
               and research. The very way these digitized images are aggregated and framed has the
               potential to shift our field — ontologically, epistemologically, and
               pedagogically.
            This essay grapples with some of the complexities that the digital poses for those of
               us who teach and research colonial Latin American art. It asks a number of questions:
               In what ways can DAH methods and tools, as well as digitized visual materials, help
               us to think more critically or differently about visual culture? What challenges
               exist when working with digital images, tools, and methods?Conversations with
                  Beth Harris and Steven Zucker, the founders of Smarthistory.org, have been
                  influential on my own thinking about digital art history pedagogy. See also Harris and Zucker 2015. To explore these
               questions, I draw on responses to a questionnaire and my own pedagogical experiences.
               The questionnaire gathered information about how others in the field of colonial
               Latin American art history approach the digital in their pedagogy and research. These
               responses serve as a launching point for a broader discussion of the ramifications of
               DAH pedagogy and research as it relates to the visual culture of colonial Latin
                  America.The questionnaire asked general questions about digitized and
                  digital art history, teaching, and Omeka, as well as about the open-educational
                  resource Smarthistory. Originally, this essay also addressed a case study of using
                  the production of Smarthistory videos as a model for collaborative DAH pedagogy
                  and practice. However, because of the limitations on length for this essay, the
                  discussion of Smarthistory has been omitted, as have the questionnaire responses
                  about it. This data will be used for a separate essay to be published
                  elsewhere. Also serving as a springboard to wrestling with these issues are
               my own experiences with DAH pedagogy and the challenges it has presented to both me
               and my students when discussing and analyzing colonial Latin American art. In
               particular, I describe a course project that asks students to build digital
               exhibitions about Spanish colonial art using the content management system (CMS)
               called Omeka . Discussions about metadata and the use of
               digital images prompted the students and me to consider issues of digital and visual
               epistemology, digital visuality and storytelling, art historical nomenclature, the
               ontology of art history, digital colonialism and neocolonialism, accessibility, and
               labor — all in the course of a semester. These considerations aided students in not
               only thinking more critically about colonial Latin American art, but also developing
               digital and multimodal literacy with Web 2.0 technology.For a useful discussion
                  of Web 2.0 and the ontology of the digital, see Evens
                     2012. In focusing on these pedagogical experiences, I hope to
               highlight some of the greater implications of the digital world for the study of
               colonial Latin American visual culture and pay heed to how DAH pedagogy can both
               disrupt and disturb art history.
         

            Gathering Data from a Questionnaire
            To collect information from other scholars teaching and researching the visual
               culture of colonial Latin America, I distributed a questionnaire in English to the
               Association of Latin American Art (ALAA) listserv.In hindsight, the
                  questionnaire should have also been written in Spanish and distributed on other
                  listservs. ALAA is a U.S.-based association but with an international
                  reach.The survey gathered data anonymously with both quantitative and
               qualitative questions to develop a mixed-methods approach.Quantitative
                  questions provided basic information in a yes/no/maybe format. Each participant’s
                  qualitative responses were also analyzed using thematic analysis (coding of
                  written text into themes). It asked a series of questions about how people
               teach or research colonial Latin American art using DAH tools or resources, and
               whether they use DAH projects like Smarthistory or tools like Omeka, and if so, how.
               It compiled information about how long a participant has taught, the subjects of
               courses focused on colonial Latin American visual culture, and the orientation of
               these classes towards DAH or DH. 
            Fourteen individuals responded to the survey, offering a small, yet useful
                  n to analyze the role of the digital in teaching and researching
               about colonial Latin American visual culture.Most participants have been
                  teaching for at least six years (more than 60%), and 38.5% for more than ten. The
                  types of classes people teach vary from undergraduate surveys on colonial Latin
                  American art and architecture, to smaller classes focused on a region or specific
                  century and undergraduate or graduate seminars on a specific theme (such as
                  portraiture in the Americas or eighteenth-century Mexican painting). The
               open-ended answers varied from a few words to lengthy paragraphs. Despite this
               variability, the responses prompted thought-provoking reflection on the role of
               digitized and digital art history among those of us focused on the visual culture of
               colonial Latin America. The collected data revealed a number of important concerns,
               among them (1) the broad way in which individuals define, understand, and use
                  the digital when researching or teaching about colonial Latin
               American visual culture; (2) the perception that digitized and digital art history
               have the potential to advance the study of Latin American art and to complicate or
               decenter the canon, even if the specific ways in which this might occur seem vague
               and undetermined; (3) the importance of access to high-resolution images, archival
               materials, and scholarship to ease financial burden and collaborate across
               international borders; and (4) the need for more digital resources or projects,
               despite the large number of perceived challenges, which include the limitations of
               digital technologies, the time needed to learn digital tools and skills, and the
               reliability and trustworthiness of these tools and projects. The remainder of this
               essay explores these ideas in connection to pedagogical strategies and experiences
               with digital art history in an undergraduate class focused on colonial Latin American
               visual culture.
         

            Using and Defining Digitized and Digital Art History
            The general consensus from the responses on the questionnaire is that working with
               digital tools and digitized visual materials offers clear benefits to any scholar or
               student of art history, regardless of their specialization.When asked if DAH
                  tools and methods offer new approaches to teaching or researching the art of
                  colonial Latin America, almost all respondents answered yes (76.9%). 23.1%
                  answered maybe. These benefits include access to materials from around the
               globe, the use of high-resolution images for study, the opportunity to create a
               visual archive of images currently split among international collections, or the
               invitation to engage with materials more slowly from anywhere at any time. The
               qualitative responses detailed the various ways respondents felt that DAH had
               impacted (or could impact) their research, teaching, the field of colonial Latin
               American art, and art history more generally. Many suggested that DAH provides new
               ways of interacting with data, helps us to ask new types of questions, and shifts how
               we understand visual culture. However, most respondents mentioned that they were
               unsure what these interactions or shifts might look like and whether they were
               sustainable. When asked if they themselves are active in DAH or DH, 42.9% responded
               yes, 35.7% maybe, and 21.4% no. Written responses suggested that some participants
               were simply unsure if what they were doing counted as DAH; for
               example, several wondered if using a university’s CMS in their colonial Latin
               American art classes meant they had familiarity with or practiced DAH. Others noted
               their reticence to answer yes because they were unsure how to define DAH
               altogether, noting that they could not align themselves with it if they do not know
               what it is, and if art historians more generally cannot agree how to define it.
            Respondents relied on a wide range of digital tools and methods for their research,
               but this use was more limited pedagogically.Responses describing the impact of
                  the digital on research were the most varied and detailed, indicating the numerous
                  ways in which information is searched, retrieved, collected, and analyzed. Most
                  commonly, respondents use museum websites to source images and access digitized
                  archival materials. Beyond these, respondents listed the importance of general
                  Google searches, and the use of specific Google tools like Scholar and Books, as
                  well as Wikipedia, Academia.edu, Zotero, Dropbox, Videoconferencing, spatial and
                  textual analysis, spreadsheets, and social media (e.g., Twitter). 69.2%
               answered that their classes are not oriented towards DAH; remaining responses were
               split between yes and maybe. A follow-up question asked participants to describe
               those classes that foregrounded, or at least incorporated to some extent, digital
               methods and tools. Several individuals incorporate textual analysis, mapping, image
               annotation, or the creation and curation of online projects (such as the development
               of an online exhibition using Omeka). Most commonly, though, respondents linked
               students to digital image repositories, essays, and videos from sites like Vistas
                  , Smarthistory [2018], and The Metropolitan Museum’s Heilbrunn Timeline (2000–2018). These
               answers further highlighted the confusion (and in some cases frustration) about how
               to define or understand DAH or what constitutes doing it or using it in the classroom
               setting.
            Digital Art History is one aspect of the Digital Humanities, and both have affected
               the development of the humanities more broadly. Those engaged with DAH cross
               disciplinary boundaries, incorporating not only art history and computer science, but
               also media studies and library and information science. As the questionnaire
               responses highlighted, defining DH or DAH is challenging, as there is no clear
               consensus around how to understand either . I would
                  also argue, as others have before me, that soon the digital will be dropped
                  from digital art history . Rodríguez-Ortega’s essay
                     (2019) also notes that special journal
                  volumes on DAH will likely no longer be published. Complicating matters
               further is that digital (or digitized) visual materials, image repositories, and
               databases are often not considered synonymous with DAH. Several scholars have
               articulated the difference between digitized art history and DAH (e.g., Drucker 2013; Rodríguez-Ortega 2013a, 2019; Bishop 2015; see also Zorich
                  2012; Baca and Helmreich 2013; Fletcher 2015; and Drucker, Helmreich, Lincoln, and Rose 2015). For them, creating and using
               digital repositories that simply aggregate data and/or
                  images are examples of digitized art history , whereas research that uses computational analysis (e.g., GIS mapping,
               data visualization, topic modeling, network analysis, data mining) is an example of
               DAH. I am reticent to separate digitized art history entirely from digital art
               history, however. The digitization of materials and their manipulation — cropping,
               whitening, framing, straightening, and deciding what to include or exclude — affect
               how we understand what we are seeing, advancing certain epistemological arguments, a
               position Barbara Mundy and Dana Leibsohn also address in Digital
                  Resources: The State of Digital Research on the Visual Culture of Spanish
                  America (2017), which provides a state of
               the field as well as describes potential issues with accessibility, collaboration,
               and the effects of the digital on ways of seeing (see also Rodríguez-Ortega 2018, 2019).
            It is more valuable perhaps to distinguish between digital inflection and digital
               centeredness. The former uses certain digital technologies to create something that
               is similar to existing modes of writing or teaching; for instance, asking students to
               reflect on an artwork in a blog post. Digital centeredness suggests foregrounding
               digital technologies to generate new types of questions, methods, or ideas that more
               traditional ones cannot or have not; for instance, creating 3D models , crowdsourcing to match print sources with colonial
               paintings , or mapping the locations of artworks described in
               archival documents .
            Most questionnaire respondents insinuated that the digital turn offers important
               benefits for pedagogy, research, and the very manner in which we determine what
               constitutes colonial Latin American visual culture, even if what DAH is remains
               amorphous. The increase, especially in the past decade, of projects revolving around
               colonial Latin American art supports this claim that DAH is beneficial (see also Mundy and Leibsohn 2017). These projects offer
               specialists and students alike the ability to learn about Latin American visual
               culture and its history in multimodal ways (such as with photographs, video, 3D
               reconstructions, 360-degree panoramas, text, music, and data visualizations), and
               even exposure to less canonical (e.g., Vistas), partial, or destroyed objects (e.g.,
               Digital Aponte), architecture, and primary sources related to the visual, material
               record.
             A few survey responses indicated the importance of reaching out to different publics
               — scholars, students, anyone interested in colonial Latin American art, and those
               individuals who might develop interest in it as a result of searching the Web.
               Projects like Vistas, Digital Códice Mendoza , Project on
               Engraved Sources of Spanish Colonial Art , and Digital Aponte
                   also suggest the myriad ways that DAH projects can
               engage various types of audiences. The Digital Códice Mendoza, for instance, is
               bilingual (Spanish and English) and allows users to zoom in and pan across
               high-resolution scans of the entire codex, and offers transcriptions of the text as
               you hover over it. It is of interest to art historians, but also historians,
               paleographers, archaeologists, and so forth, and is accessible to anyone with the
               internet.
            A couple respondents mentioned that DAH has the ability to challenge entrenched ideas
               about the field of art history, and the role of colonial Latin American art within
               it. For example, one noted the importance of nimble online projects like Smarthistory
               as alternatives to textbooks that are not updated regularly. Smarthistory is, for
               lack of a better term, a not-for-profit open educational resource that focuses on
               world art. It is the result of collaboration among more than 400 art historians. New
               essays and videos can be added continuously and information updated regularly,
               helping to dispel the notion that art history — and colonial Latin American art by
               extension — is fixed.A series of recent blog posts on Smarthistory expand on
                  this very idea .
            
            The idea that digital art history projects can reach wider audiences and disrupt the
               field of colonial Latin American art history is one that warrants greater discussion.
               Here, I would like to offer a few reflections and discussion points about how
               incorporating digital art history practices into undergraduate classes about colonial
               Latin American visual culture has encouraged better digital critical thinking by
               encouraging students to think about art history’s ontological issues and
               nomenclature, descriptive metadata, and issues of colonialism (or neocolonialism), as
               well as the ways in which digital images have the potential to reframe how we
               understand the visual culture of this region and time period.These classes
                  include Spanish Colonial, Latin American (1492–present), and Global Renaissance
                  art.
            
         

            Art History’s Ontological Issues and Descriptive Metadata
            Art history has long been about classifying art based on style and iconography. One
               could argue that for much of its existence, the field has been focused on cataloging
               works of art and architecture to create, as much as possible, neat taxonomies. If we
               think back to the origins of the discipline, the art historians who shaped the
               formation of art history in the late eighteenth, nineteenth, and early twentieth
               centuries, from Johann Winckelmann, Aby Warburg, and Erwin Panofsky to Alois Riegl,
               Hienrich Wöfflin, and George Kubler, created classification systems and vocabularies
               still used today to discuss form and subject matter. They are systems largely
               centered around and stemming from European art.Matthew Lincoln has also made
                  this point (2014). In particular there has
               been a privileging of Italian Renaissance art and the stylistic terms used to
               describe art from the Italian Peninsula between 1400 and 1600, what Svetlana Alpers
                  (1979) and others refer to as Italocentrism. Many
               of these stylistic labels, such as Renaissance or Baroque, have also become temporal
               descriptors, denoting a time period (e.g., Maravall
                  1986) and sometimes a place, rather than a representational mode.
            The nomenclature of art history developed to describe European art has been appended
               to the visual culture of areas outside of Europe, including those areas, such as
               Latin America, in which Europeans invaded and colonized people and introduced new
               visual systems. Colonial Latin American art calls into question where we have
               centered the canon, the terminology we use to discuss art, and even the spaces and
               places where art is found. Periodizations describing European artistic trends do not
               transplant neatly (nor should they) to the Americas, creating what Ananda
               Cohen-Aponte [2017, 69] notes is one of many
                  unresolved issues facing scholars who study colonial
               Latin American visual culture. Cohen-Aponte points to the innocuous terminology [2017, 69]
               applied to viceregal art, seeking to problematize it in an attempt to decolonize art
               history. Jeanette Peterson has similarly discussed how a term such as Renaissance
                  advances or impedes our ability to analyze and understand
                  visual culture from the viceregal period [2008, 322]. She asks, for instance, how do we categorize an early seventeenth-century ivory figure of the Mexican Virgin of
                  Guadalupe made by Chinese carvers working in the Philippines, transported across
                  the Pacific in the Manila galleon fleet bound for Acapulco and ultimately destined
                  for American and European consumers? [2008, 331–332]. Do we simply note it as Renaissance or the more generic
               sixteenth century? Despite the challenges with applying these terms to colonial Latin
               American visual culture, it has proven difficult to omit them entirely, even in
               instances when they do not fit comfortably (e.g., Sullivan 1996; Peterson 2008, 322).
            Where does digital art history fit into these discussions about nomenclature and the
               ontology of art history? If we were to reconceptualize Peterson’s question about the
               ivory figure of Guadalupe from the point of view of DAH, we might ask, how could we
               translate this object, one which resists easy classification, into tidy,
                  objective metadata? After all, many DAH projects necessitate
               the creation of metadata about images. While not speaking specifically to the
               potential challenges and issues of inputting descriptive metadata in a digital
               environment, much of Peterson’s discussion, as well as Cohen-Aponte’s, revolve around
               similar issues.
            I would argue that there are DAH processes and ideas that can assist scholars and
               students to think more critically about the terminology used to describe colonial
               Latin American art in the digital environment. If one of the main reasons for
               engaging with the digital is to access information, as the questionnaire responses
               all noted, then how we input, organize, aggregate, and source that data is
               fundamentally significant. My own experiences with introducing students to metadata,
               as one step towards producing a collaborative online exhibition on Omeka, has
               stimulated important and thought-provoking conversations about how we describe,
               analyze, frame, and discuss colonial Latin American art.While most
                  questionnaire respondents used (or at least knew of) Smarthistory, few used Omeka
                  in any of their classes. 42.9% use Smarthistory in their classes. Only 7.7%
                  employed Omeka. One participant noted that she uses it herself but had not yet
                  introduced it to students. The two respondents who did incorporate Omeka asked
                  students to create digital exhibitions of artworks. It helped students to
               develop digital literacy and to grasp more fully the non-neutrality of visual
               resources, DAH projects, and the Web more generally. It also increased their
               awareness of how we access information and how the presentation of that information
               affects what we know or think we know, how we see, and where we locate knowledge
               about colonial Latin American visual culture.
            To create their online exhibition with Omeka, students must learn about metadata. In
               the process of creating metadata, students must weigh the eurocentric (and colonial)
               bias of art historical nomenclature and terminology. Metadata is data about data to
               help create an archive or catalogue for retrieving information. It enables us to
               locate, evaluate, and use specific types of visual images (including video). Omeka
               uses Dublin Core elements to create metadata, and these elements include title,
               subject, description, creator, source, publisher, date, format, type, identifier, and
               coverage .Dublin Core is centered around fifteen
                     core elements that were created in an attempt to
                  standardize metadata by providing specific standards for inputting data across
                  fields. Most of the information in these fields are what some might call
                  indisputable information, or objective information akin to
               what we expect to find in a caption or exam slide identifications. For example, the
               metadata for a photographic reproduction of Manuel de Arellano’s Virgin of Guadalupe
               For the image, see https://collections.lacma.org/node/220044?parent=589011. from
               1691 at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art could read as follows: 
                  title: Virgin of Guadalupe subject: Madonnas (using the Library of
                  Congress Thesaurus for Graphic Materials) or perhaps Mary, Blessed Virgin, Saint —
                  Apparitions and miracles (using the LCSH, or Library of Congress Subject Headings)
                  author: Manuel de Arellano description: A painting of the Virgin of
                  Guadalupe, one of the most venerated Marian advocations in the world. It
                  replicates the original tilma worn by Juan Diego. creator: LACMA source:
                  LACMA publisher: LACMA date: 1691 (or the date of the photograph)
                  format: oil on canvas (or the type of digital file) identifier: a URL to
                  the LACMA collection page coverage: Mexico Beyond these metadata
               fields, users can also create tags to help identify and locate items. For Arellano’s
               painting, these might include painting, sacred, Marian imagery,
                  seventeenth century, and so forth.
            Deciding what to write in each field can be complicated, and tougher still when it
               becomes clear that this information that seems objective is actually a fiction of
               objectivity. Many metadata descriptions are subjective. As several scholars remark,
                  objectivity is defined by consensus, not by authority.
                  Metadata needs to be a part of that consensus-building process
               . For example, when entering tags about an item
               into the Dublin Core, what someone decides to include or exclude impacts how this
               item is discovered and engaged with in a digital environment. This is also the case
               when asked to summarize the content of the item in the description. Arellano’s Virgin of Guadalupe could be described in any number of
               ways. This is not solely an issue about quality control, but also whose voice (or
               voices) gets to be heard.
            Descriptive metadata is thus a crucial component for how we access and even analyze
               visual artifacts. Yet descriptive metadata is indexed with words that must be input
               by people who bring their own interpretative lens to the process. Murtha Baca
               describes the inherent challenges to this process, and the problems it can pose for
               creating objective metadata. In her words, Anyone familiar with art information knows that often the subject
                     matter or theme of a work of art is not reflected at all in its title. . . . I
                     can only find them [images] if the descriptive terms . . . have been applied to
                     them by a human being who has looked at an image, interpreted the file, the
                     visual information, and other available data, and made the decision to apply
                     these data values to it [2002, 34].
               But herein lies one of several challenges: What does this descriptive data look like?
               What terminology do we include or omit? Who decides what is important data to be
               indexed? In a specialization like colonial Latin American art history, a field filled
               with scholars actively critiquing the problematic terminology used to classify and
               analyze visual culture, how do we generate objective, consistent descriptive
               metadata?
            This question is repeatedly posed in my classes focused on the visual culture of the
               Spanish Americas. Early on in the courses, I ask students to create metadata (using
               the Dublin Core fields) for the open chapel murals of the convento of San Nicolás,
               Actopan, in Hidalgo, Mexico. This low-stakes activity, completed on paper in teams,
               helps them learn about Dublin Core elements before they actually complete their main
               course project on Omeka. They need to fill in the fields for title, subject,
               description, creator, source, date, format, identifier, and coverage.For
                  explanations of each of these fields, see Omeka Team 2018b. The results
               reveal to students the challenges with standardizing metadata and with using art
               historical terminology developed to describe European art primarily. For instance,
               for the title, most students write overly generalized descriptive titles (e.g.,
                  Murals,
               Open Chapel, or Murals with Christian Subject
                  Matter). Each field presents its own challenge to students, but it is
               the topic of what to write for the creator that stimulates the greatest (and most
               passionate) debate.
            Almost every student struggles with what to write in the creator field, with
               descriptors ranging from Anonymous artist and
                  People to Indigenous artist(s) and
                  Subjugated Artist. Students read Carolyn Dean and Dana
               Leibsohn’s Hybridity and Its Discontents (2003), which generally sparks a heated discussion about
               how we talk about who produced colonial Latin American art and how we describe it.
               Students have not come to a consensus about what word or phrase is best to use, and
               by the end of class some students are visibly frustrated, confused, or even angry.
               One student noted in a written reflection that she felt lied
                  to about the superficial objectivity of information in image captions, or
               in this case, with metadata found online.Students were asked to write a short,
                  written reflection after each class period. She elaborated further that the
               way metadata is presented gives us the impression that it is objective, suggesting it
               is indisputable, but now she realized that the personal biases we have inform the
               production of metadata.
            In the following period, I ask students to create tags of the same image, and they
               have ranged from Last Judgment, polychromy, and mendicant art to
                  bright, damaged, and early modern. This generates another
               reflective moment in the class about the usefulness of tagging, but also the
               limitations and potential problems of indexing images more generally. The discussion
               eventually turns to the possibility of social tagging, a common practice on social
               media sites like Tumblr and Flickr (and even among museum sites like the Brooklyn
               Museum). Many students have noted that social tagging might circumvent some of the
               problems associated with the controlled vocabulary used commonly for metadata (like
               the Library of Congress [LoC] subject headings). With social tagging, more voices
               could be represented, and in different languages, providing more opportunities to
               find images like the Actopan open chapel. The general idea of social tagging
               certainly can aid in overcoming some of the limitations of controlled vocabularies or
               the trickiness of metadata fields, even if it creates its own
               challenges, such as too many tags, incorrect tags (e.g., misspelled words), or
               inaccurate tags (see Chai, Zhang, and Jin 2007; Ménard 2009).For more on the challenges of
                  creating collaborative metadata in the classroom, see Richardson 2020. This
               user-generated tagging has been dubbed as folksonomy, or
               language created by the masses which in this case constitutes
               user-generated tags . Despite the potential
               limitations of social tagging, many museums have adopted the practice as a way to
               further democratize museums and make museums more user-friendly . The Brooklyn Museum’s enconchado
                  biombo with the Siege of Belgrade and Hunting Scene, for example,
               currently has forty-four user-generated tags that range from the general (e.g.,
                  screen) to the specific (oars).To see the image, its metadata,
                  and social tags, visit https://www.brooklynmuseum.org/opencollection/objects/207337. By
               engaging in practices and discussions about metadata and tagging, students develop an
               awareness for the ways in which a single word alters meaning, and in some cases
               completely reframes how we understand an object or space, such as the Actopan open
               chapel, or allows users to locate information on the Web.I am reminded of
                  Cohen-Aponte’s recent discussion about decolonizing the global renaissance,
                  encapsulated by her discussion about terminology. She notes the important
                  ramifications of changing just one word, such as if we were to change the sentence
                     viceregal art…as art that just so happened to coincide with colonization to art produced under colonization [2017, 74].
            
             This exercise not only prompts reflection and critique about metadata and art
               historical nomenclature, but also reveals some of the limitations of DAH in the
               process. As one student in this class stated, if we can’t agree
                  [on] what to write in most of these [Dublin Core] elements, then how will that
                  affect how people locate our materials? Another noted that she felt she
               would have an easier time with inputting an image of
                  Michelangelo’s Sistine Chapel but it is really hard to create clear information
                  about some [colonial] Mexican art. Yet another student’s response is
               telling of how important these thorny questions and considerations are: [E]ven if we can’t agree on what to write [for the metadata], we
                  still need to move forward. . . . Otherwise, people might not even know it exists
                  if they don’t go to college or read books. I believe what this student was
               hinting at is the same idea posed by Mark Turin in his essay on The Devil in the Digital: the notion that much of what many people learn
               today is mediated through the digital. If something [is] not
                  discoverable through an online search or a digital catalogue, it could appear to
                  not exist at all [2015, 125.] These
               students have determined some of the challenges of DAH. Many DAH projects rely on
               metadata, and metadata is created by people, with all of their biases and
               irrationalities. They had honed in on the very humanness of the digital
               humanities.
         

            Digital Colonialism and the Digital Divide
            Can the metadata we create about colonial Latin American objects be a form of digital
               colonialism? This is a question raised on several occasions in my classes. Metadata
               produces knowledge in the online environment, shaping how people relate to and
               understand Latin American visual culture. If the information that we create
               perpetuates colonialist discourse, overlooks the diversity of voices that lay claim
               to this cultural heritage, or simplifies the information so as to become
               anachronistic, then there is the risk of participating in acts of neocolonialism. In
               this complex digital world in which we live then, how do we responsibly create
               digital content without engaging in digital or technological colonialism? What
               ethical considerations are involved in the production of knowledge in the digital
               environment? And what does this look like for those of us who teach and research the
               visual culture of colonial Latin America?
            When I first developed this project, and as students continued to learn about Omeka
               and the Dublin Core elements for their course project, students decided that it would
               be useful if everyone in the team relied on the LoC Subject Headings (LCSH) and
               Classification for specific elements, such as creator. The LCSH are frequently used,
               not only in the U.S. but also internationally, and are considered a more traditional
               classification system. I initially agreed with the students’ decision to proceed
               accordingly. However, as became clear to myself and students, even a quick scan of
               the LCSH reveals that they can unknowingly perpetuate colonialist, biased, and racist
               discourse. For instance, to familiarize students with the LCSH, I asked students to
               look at how monographs about Spanish colonial art incorporated them in the front
                  matter.The LCSH used are not determined by the authors themselves. An
               examination of five recent monographs dedicated to the visual culture of
               post-conquest sixteenth-century Mexico included the LCSH Indians
                  of Mexico, often with further subject headings attached such as Indians of Mexico — ethnic identity,
               Indian art, or Indians of Mexico —
                  Missions — History — 16th century. The terms Indigenous or First Nation do
               not appear, and often the specific ethnic group or groups are omitted from LCSH
               unless the monograph is specific to one of them (and if the term exists at all). The
               use of terminology like Indian art is thus vague and reductionistic, but also
               reifies the colonialist discourse that so many postcolonial and decolonial thinkers
               have attempted to alter. 
            One way in which it is possible to rectify some of these imbalances and problems is
               to do what the University of Alberta’s Decolonizing Description Working Group (DDWG)
               has done, and what other institutions, such as the John Carter Brown Library, are
               seeking to do.In 2017, the JCBL posted a position for a postdoctoral fellow for
                  data curation in Latin American and Caribbean Indigenous languages. As stated in
                  the job description, The goal of this project is to assess
                     how digital tools and metadata created through collaborative processes across a
                     hemispheric arc can serve scholarly and non-scholarly communities now and into
                     the future. See https://www.clir.org/fellowships/postdoc/applicants/john-carter-brown-library-brown-university/.
                The DDWG note that their aim is to investigate, define
                  and propose a plan of action for how UAL can more accurately, appropriately, and
                  respectfully represent Indigenous peoples and contexts through our descriptive
                  metadata practices
               . As they describe, appropriate
                  subject access and descriptive practices are a social justice issue and a moral
                  imperative. They provide examples of the transformations they have made to
               subject headings used in metadata, such as switching Abused
                  Indian children, the LCSH, to Abused Indigenous
                  children. In class, students have seemed excited about the possibility of
               such a project, especially the notion of descriptive metadata practices as they
               relate to social justice issues, and how this might alter how publics access and
               understand information they encounter on the Web. One student commented that she
                  never had thought about these things before, like how racist
                  or gendered metadata could be. I’d really never thought about metadata at
                  all. She reflected that the components of the Omeka project had even
               caused her to rethink what she sees on her personal social media accounts (like
               Instagram and Facebook) and YouTube.
            The process of creating this course project raises the question of how we can be
               mindful of not replicating colonialism in new ways. As discussed above, the process
               of metadata creation seems simple enough on the surface, but in reality is a more
               complex venture. As Roopika Risam advises, we must be wary of the violence that
               occurs in discursive forms, such as reproducing colonial influences in the production of digital knowledge and
                  centering epistemologies and ontologies of the Global North . . . which in turn
                  decenters those of Indigenous communities and the Global South [2018, 2]. For those of us who practice art history, we
               must be cognizant of how metadata — and digital tools and projects beyond this — has
               the ability to act as a neocolonial dynamic, and one that situates the Global North
               as the site of knowledge production.See also
                  Fiormonte 2016 for another discussion about the Global South, the production of
                  knowledge, and DH.
            
         

            Access and the Digital Divide
            Access to materials, whether to digital photographs (or videos) or to archival or
               scholarly materials about colonial Latin American visual culture, impinges upon what
               and how we teach and research. High-resolution images are essential for teaching and
               research, and more than half of the survey’s respondents mentioned the need for their
               greater availability. Among the many reasons increased accessibility is needed,
               respondents listed the high cost of travel and the many international collections
               that now possess colonial Latin American objects, as well as the lack of high-res
               images in repositories like ArtStor or Bridgeman Images. For the latter, there is
               also a fee to acquire them. Moreover, as the academy continues to rely on adjunct
               labor with absurdly low pay, the need for free, open access to materials was noted as
               imperative. One response indicated that with greater access to objects and places
               that are less well known (if at all) the conversations around colonial Latin American
               art could also noticeably shift.
            Besides access to high-resolution digital images, participants noted that certain
               digital tools or projects also could bypass pay-walled journals with costly
               subscriptions or academic presses that sell materials at high costs, all of which are
               largely inaccessible without access to a university library. As one respondent noted,
               DAH projects about Latin American visual culture challenge how and where knowledge is
               stored; rather than solely in academic journals or printed books, DAH projects have
               the potential to remove burdensome financial costs, to provide free access to anyone
               untethered to a university system, and to allow for more collaboration across
               international borders.
            While access to more visual and textual materials was noted as a priority for
               researching and teaching about Latin American visual culture, respondents also noted
               that digitization initiatives and DAH projects have important limitations. One
               respondent worried about the implications of a project’s obsolescence. Several
               commented on the issue of collections (visual or archival) that do not have the funds
               or equipment to digitize their materials, or individuals who do not receive funding
               to produce and maintain a project online. Their concern is that research agendas and
               general trends in the field could therefore be determined on what is and is not
               available digitally. Mundy and Leibsohn (2017) agree
               that a canon of Latin American visual culture has formed around what has been made
               more available in the digital domain. This is also true for printed texts, such as
               those digitized for Google Books. Any library that has not provided access to Google
               Inc. will have considerably less traffic, which affects current and future research.
               This could then profoundly alter the production of knowledge about Latin American
               colonial history and art, as well as the cultural heritage of the many peoples and
               countries who have a connection to it. In my viceregal art class, this was certainly
               the case. Students tended to rely primarily on sources that could be found online,
               such as e-books through the university’s library portal, Google Books, the Getty
               Research Portal, or the John Carter Brown Library.
            Open access to knowledge and to visual materials are important, and the immediacy
               they afford us has the potential to upset problematic aspects facing the academy
               (such as budget cuts, less time to travel, and the increase in adjunct labor) and the
               destruction or loss of cultural heritage. But who gets to grant this access? And
               should all knowledge and imagery be made more accessible? Risam (2018) and Afanador Llach (2019) rightly remind us that the notion that information is and should be
               free is an assumption of the Global North, one that does not necessarily accord with
               Indigenous communities of the Global South. Even universal access to the Web is, as
               Rodríguez-Ortega states, a myth [2013a, 131; see
               also 2018]. A huge portion of the world’s
               population is still without access to the internet, and it is worth reflecting how
               the digital practices we engage in could potentially further this digital divide. 
            The issue of access is also one of language. English is the lingua franca of the Web,
               which can be another barrier for anyone who does not know or use English 
               . It can deepen the digital divide. Many DAH
               projects centered around colonial Latin American art are in English, though there are
               also examples of bilingual projects (e.g., Digital Códice Mendoza) that offer
               excellent models for moving forward. As students in my class have wondered, what
               attempts have been made or can be made to sidestep the perpetual dominance of the
               Global North as gatekeepers to knowledge? Collaboration, as noted in the
               questionnaire responses and among students, seems to offer an appealing solution to
               how we can ensure greater accessibility and perspectives.
         

            Collaboration, Image Design and Manipulation, and the (In)Visibility of
               Labor
            Final issues that warrant discussion are collaboration, image design and
               manipulation, and the labor involved in creating digitized materials or DAH projects.
               In the classes on viceregal art described above, each team crafts their own Omeka
               exhibition, with the team designing a theme and an introductory statement that frames
               each individual’s entries.See Kilroy-Ewbank 2018 for another example of this
                  practice. Students are graded on both components, as well as the feedback
               they offer to their team members. As noted above in the metadata discussion, there
               are steps that students must learn before they create these online exhibitions. They
               need to understand how to create metadata, as well as to determine how to source
               images in the public domain or take their own photographs, upload images as items,
               create and arrange pages, and write for diverse publics 
               
               . It requires scaffolding of smaller assignments from the
               semester’s beginning.
             After our discussion about metadata and how to create it, another assignment asks
               teams to decide on their exhibition’s theme after visiting a local museum collection
               of Spanish colonial art, such as LACMA’s. Students are asked to photograph their
               chosen objects that will form the core of their individual component. Before they
               observe objects on display at the museum, I initiate a conversation about what these
               photographs could or should look like, how many they might take, and whether the
               photos might need to be corrected or manipulated in some
               capacity. This conversation usually begins with quizzical looks. As one student later
               reflected, I’ve never been asked before [in an art history
                  class] to consider how I take photos or what I might need to do to make them look
                  beautiful. This discussion inevitably returns us to the importance of how
               we frame or reframe art, how digital images shift the production of knowledge and our
               understanding of colonial Latin American art, and how the choices we make to show or
               not to show specific aspects of an object or building can alter how someone
               understands it. We watch a Smarthistory video to discuss how the visual choices made
               in it might affect how we understand a specific work of art and how the visuals
               create an argument. I typically have students watch Smarthistory videos
                     not related to Spanish colonial art, including Augustus of Primaporta (https://youtu.be/3i8iou6tXqY) or
                  Polykleitos’s Doryphoros (https://youtu.be/EAR9RAMg9NY). On occasion, it has also raised
               thought-provoking discussions about labor, both visible and invisible, that broached
               larger issues involved in digitized and DAH, namely how we assign credit for the work
               being done. 
             To provide a brief example, one team framed their exhibition around sacred imagery.
               One student chose Arellano’s Virgin of Guadalupe to
               probe localized sacred imagery specifically. At LACMA, he brought his expensive
               camera and took dozens of photographs in the manner of Smarthistory’s Steven Zucker,
               the student’s cited model . He not only took photographs
               of the entire painting but numerous details, as well as photographs of the painting
               from the side and in relation to objects displayed near it, from far away within the
               gallery space, with visitors in front of the painting, and in black-and-white. The
               student either already knew or learned how to use image manipulation software like
               Adobe Photoshop because his resulting images also included callouts, highlights,
               color correction, complicated cropping, and straightening.
            During the peer review process, this student’s component was met with both wonder and
               anxiety by his fellow teammates. They were concerned that his images were of such
               high quality so as to make their own individual essays look less legitimate or less
               serious. Most students took photos on their smartphones and had not manipulated them;
               they were blurry, dark, and crooked, and some had not captured portions of the object
               itself. The team member with high-quality photographs offered to share his expertise
               but wondered if the time he spent helping his teammates to improve their resulting
               digital images would negatively impact his own project because he would have less
               time to focus on it. 
            In the end, the process prompted an unexpected but important conversation about how
               digitized images affect our perceptions of digital projects and about the labor
               involved in creating them. I was reminded of Daniela Bleichmar’s discussion of
               colonial Latin American art and visual epistemology, or the role
                  of visuality as a way of knowing, and the process of observation, collecting,
                  representation, and circulation that were integral to the production of
                  knowledge [2015, 240]. Pairing
               Bleichmar’s essay with the work they were doing in class proved especially
               generative, with students finding compelling parallels between processes and projects
               of the past with those in their digital present. Importantly, it also encouraged
               students to revisit online projects that we had discussed in class to think
               critically about how the material is presented and how this creates a digital and
               visual argument. It also stimulated a great deal of dialogue about the need for more
               accessible high-resolution images of colonial Latin American visual culture, a point
               that the questionnaire’s respondents repeatedly emphasized.
            Another important point the above example illuminates is the labor involved in
               digitization, whether of books or images, or in digital work, such as working
               collaboratively. A great deal of labor goes uncited, unnoticed, as has been addressed
               more recently by many working in the Digital Humanities (e.g. Keralis 2016; Graban, Marty,
                  Romano, and Vandergrift 2019]. In her written reflection, a student pointed
               out that the invisibility of this labor calls to mind the invisibility of labor used
               to create the art and architecture of the sixteenth-century Spanish Americas. Even
               when the creator of digital content is known, such as the photographer who took
               certain photos and made them available on Flickr Commons, there is a great deal of
               labor that might go unaccounted for. Image manipulation can be time consuming, and to
               get it just right varies depending on the creator. Individuals
               responsible for digitizing materials in museums, archives, or libraries, whether for
               an institution’s website (such as The Metropolitan Museum of Art or Mexico’s Archivo
               General de la Nación) or a large corporate entity (such as Google Books) are almost
               never named. Crowdsourcing, for projects like PESSCA or the recent ALAA digital art
               history resources page, is not free or visible labor, as a recent blog post on the
               Getty Iris also mentions .PESSCA is the Project on
                  the Engraved Sources of Spanish Colonial Art (https://colonialart.org/). ALAA is the
                  Association of Latin American Art, and its digital resources page is found here:
                     https://associationlatinamericanart.org/digital-resources/. The
               concern of my student, who offered to share his photoshopping expertise, about his
               time and labor raised this issue on a micro-scale within the classroom.
         

            A Final Reflection
            Creating metadata and making an [Omeka] exhibit were totally new
                  experiences for me. . . . Both processes made the art [of the Spanish Americas]
                  far more accessible to me and help[ed] me develop better critical thinking skills
                  about what I see online. . . . They also made me feel uncomfortable because I
                  think my generation just assumes all stuff online is true, even when teachers tell
                  us it isn’t. But now I kinda get it. This statement, in a student’s final
               reflection, sums up much of what I have been discussing here and the relationship
               between the digital, colonial Latin American art, and pedagogy. As is clear from this
               class project, digital art history can disturb and disrupt how students approach
               colonial Latin American art. As I hope this essay demonstrates, while the digital
               turn offers many positive ways in which we can rethink and reframe art history and
               specifically the visual culture of colonial Latin America, it seems mindful to be
               wary of the notion that it can create a false perception of a techno-utopia in which
               all creators and users are equal, and information is always readily accessible and
               objective.
         

            Acknowledgments
            I dedicate this essay to Linda Rodriguez, who passed from this life too soon. She
               offered excellent feedback on this essay early on, for which I am so grateful. I also
               thank Hannah Alpert-Abrams, Clayton McCarl, and the two DHQ peer reviewers for their
               helpful feedback. Any errors are my own.
            This essay was written in the spring and summer of 2018.
         
