Title:  Digital Humanities, Postfoundationalism, Postindustrial
                    Culture
Volume:  008
Issue:  1
Date:  24 April 2014
Abstract:  
                
                This article articulates a view of the digital humanities that hopes to advance
                    the discipline across broad scholarly and administrative contexts. It will
                    succeed in its aims if it is both comprehensible to newcomers and stimulating
                    for experienced practitioners: a bridging effort, but one
                    undertaken with serious intent. It proceeds by isolating a key debate for
                    examination, describing two concepts that go a significant distance to solving
                    issues raised by that debate (but not far enough), and exploring the theoretical
                    writings of a selection of high profile digital humanists. The goal (a
                    non-trivial undertaking) is to illustrate the utility of postfoundationalism as
                    a conceptual tool, its interdependence with postindustrial culture, and the
                    light it sheds on our understanding of what DH is. If successful the
                    article, rather than making an essentialist claim that Digital Humanities is
                        defined by postfoundational method, will constitute a contribution to
                    the developing digital humanities agenda.
                
            
Full Body Text: 
I would like to thank Alan Liu for reading an early version of this article, and
                Julia Flanders and the anonymous DHQ reviewers for
                their extensive and penetrating comments. All failures of interpretation and fact
                are the responsibility of the author. 

                Preparatory
                This article seeks to explore concepts of significance to the broader Humanities
                    community, and in so doing graft them into the main trunk of Digital Humanities
                    theory and method. This makes a position statement useful. The argument that
                    follows reflects an approach to Digital Humanities (and a view of Digital
                    Humanities) oriented towards the Humanities Computing tradition and what Patrick
                    Svensson would refer to as the 
                        technology as tool
                        
                     approach to the field. Because of this, it risks hypostasizing what is
                    only a thesis into a statement of intent, or worse, a totalizing claim that the
                    ground of our discipline is of a particular (rather than multivariate) nature.
                    That would be an unsupportable, and unproductive, approach. That said, it
                        is my hope that the article provides additional intellectual
                    justification for a turn to code-craft practices outlined at the Speaking in
                    Code workshop at the University of Virginia’s Scholars’ Lab in 2013 , and the adoption of a mindset broadly
                    commensurate with digital artisanship. That topic requires further exploration,
                    and is somewhat peripheral to this present article, but is important to keep in
                    mind: as a scholarly discipline we require conceptual anchors and an openness to
                    theories and methods borrowed from cognate disciplines, but in our daily
                    practice digital humanists are reminded of the importance of craft and the value
                    of tacit knowledge. It is my contention, even accepting my own rudimentary craft
                    skills, that this is where the discipline has the most to offer the broader
                    Humanities community. 
                It is counter-productive, however, to ignore the field’s entanglement with
                    postindustrial culture, the rise of technocratic and neoliberal modes of
                    government, and the so-called crisis in the humanities that
                    has seen Humanities disciplines struggle with policy decisions weighted in favor
                    of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines 
                    . Although a complex soup, this comprises the
                    post-World War Two cultural, intellectual and technological background to the
                    field: it is an important part of our heritage as a community. And while it is
                    perhaps of more interest to intellectual and cultural historians than digital
                    humanists per se, it provides essential context — even, perhaps, an ontological
                    ground — that is important to parse if we are to understand the purpose and
                    potential of the field. This is especially so if it is accepted that the crisis in the Humanities,
                    whether real or imagined , is related to deeper
                    epistemological problems connected to the relative value of scientific and
                    humanistic modes of knowledge creation. This issue touches on issues of
                    fundamental importance for the scholarly community: while there is none of the
                    sense of revolution that accompanied the culture wars of
                    the latter twentieth century, some scholars are questioning the binary
                    opposition of foundationalist and anti-foundationalist modes of knowledge
                    creation, symbolized most starkly in logical positivism on the one hand and
                    postmodern relativism on the other. This paper follows G.B. Madison , J. Wentzel Van Huyssteen , Paul Healy 
                    , Dimitri Ginev 
                    , and Mark Bevir 
                     in labeling this effort
                        postfoundationalism.
                
                These writers are searching for a 
                        non-defeatist
                        
                     epistemological stance, one that rejects Cartesian foundationalism as
                    unattainable but remains capable of underwriting 
                        the truth-value of our
                            interpretations
                        
                    . The issue speaks to a broader impulse to seek methods that are 
                        
                            neither foundationalist nor relativist
                        
                    , but still capable of advancing knowledge. In his recent book on the use
                    of the R programming language for literary study, digital humanist Matthew
                    Jockers touched on something similar when he noted that methods described in his
                    book reflect a post-Popperian stance somewhere 
                        between strict positivism and
                            strict relativism
                        
                    . Jocker’s mention of post-positivism represents an important statement
                    given its associations with method in the hard and social sciences, and is
                    deserving of further exploration, but it is outside the scope of this article.
                    Post-positivism does indeed hold significant opportunities for digital humanists
                    working with methods derived from or closely associated to the computer and
                    social sciences, but the argument that follows treads a fine line between
                    researchers like Jockers whose work draws them towards methods prominent in
                    those consciously scientific disciplines, and others who
                    are more focused on cultural theory and critique. Its goal is to explore the
                    possibilities inherent in a bridging concept
                    (postfoundationalism) that might work equally well for all sectors of the
                    community. If successful it will be broadly agreeable to both ends of our
                    disciplinary spectrum; if unsuccessful it may well disappoint all parties. 
                Because of its engagement with issues of epistemology and method, there is a need
                    to navigate terrain familiar to historians of ideas: on the one hand the
                    argument must avoid the kind of unit-ideas approach, popular with mid-twentieth century historians
                    like A.O. Lovejoy, which enumerates ideas as a record of in-group culture , and on the other it must not assume to
                    comprehend the inside of
                    actors’ minds 
                    . These methodological issues are considerable, and
                    the article’s conclusions should certainly be weighed against them, but if
                    comments like Jockers’ reveal a dawning orientation for the field as a whole
                    there are many threads to pull: intellectual, cultural, historical as well as
                    theoretical and methodological. It will be enough if this present article is
                    agreed to be a useful contribution to that process.
                Another problem is, of course, that any analysis of the digital humanities must
                    traverse vast distances. Brett Bobley, CIO and Director of the U.S. National
                    Endowment for the Humanities (NEH) Office of Digital Humanities (ODH), has
                    presented a fabulously broad definition of the field that illustrates this issue
                    well: 
                        I use digital humanities as
                            an umbrella term for a number of different activities that surround
                            technology and humanities scholarship. Under the digital humanities
                            rubric, I would include topics like open access to materials,
                            intellectual property rights, tool development, digital libraries, data
                            mining, born-digital preservation, multimedia publication,
                            visualization, GIS, digital reconstruction, study of the impact of
                            technology on numerous fields, technology for teaching and learning,
                            sustainability models, media studies, and many others.
                        
                     This is well and good and, ignoring for the moment people who would
                    strongly disagree with such a broad statement, useful in its Catholicism. But it
                    makes the task of defining the digital
                        humanities difficult . Even if there is
                    no great desire to define a discipline in the traditional
                    sense of the term, the field needs to find intellectual levers that can make
                    sense of a very broad definitional continuum, and explain to stakeholders what
                    DH is, how it is connected to the current difficulties encountered by the
                    humanities, how it is connected to broader postindustrial culture, and how
                    technical DH outputs should be assessed. Without answers to these issues the
                    field is unlikely to gain either high levels of student engagement, or a portion
                    of increasingly competitive funding sources. 
                Postfoundationalism is one such intellectual lever, but the centrality of it to
                    this article should not suggest it is universally applicable, or unproblematic
                    as a concept and label: it could perhaps sit under P alongside hundreds
                    of other similar concepts in a Dictionary of DH
                        Terms, but it is enough to hope that it can serve the purposes of
                    this article and provide entry to the conceptual domain I aim to navigate. It
                    will not be useful for all digital humanists, or be applicable to all DH
                    practices. It certainly shouldn’t be accepted uncritically as a unit-idea in the Lovejoyian
                    sense. It is, however, well-suited to an exploration of the epistemological
                    implications of Svensson’s 
                        technology as tool
                        
                     approach to the digital humanities, which focuses on building digital
                    outputs ahead of engaging in more traditional humanistic pursuits related to
                    interpretation and critique. Because of this the technology as tool approach tends to produce
                    non-traditional scholarly outputs like web archives, ontologies, data models,
                    and suchlike. Indeed, much of what follows is informed by development of the UC
                    CEISMIC Canterbury Earthquakes Digital Archive and the search to find robust
                    arguments to make technical work like this count as research
                    
                    .
                Justifying non-traditional humanities work to academic administrators can be a
                    challenging task, which isn’t helped by the relative lack of conceptual work
                    across the community. Jan Christoph Meister has suggested that the amount of energy that our community
                        invests into theoretical and methodological critique of its practices and
                        their limitations is still disproportionally low, resulting in a
                    lack of understanding about what a shared methodology for the field might look like . Meister’s comment is perhaps slightly out of date
                    given the recent debates related to defining DH (one of
                    which will be examined in detail later in this paper), and it ignores
                    significant conceptual work undertaken by projects like the United Kingdom’s
                    AHRC funded ICT Methods Network (AHRC 2005 – 2008) and various communities of
                    practice (TEI, manuscript studies, epigraphy, computational linguistics) but his
                    underlying premise remains valid. There is a need to explain in scholarly terms
                    what key concepts carry weight for digital humanists, and how the field and its
                    associated theories, methods, practices, and outputs relate to broader currents
                    in intellectual culture. It is only by positioning the field in the context of
                    broader scholarly discourses and processes driving the contemporary academic
                    knowledge economy — by defining a shared methodology — that
                    a solid claim can be made for long-term institutional investment in it. 
                This article therefore articulates a view of the digital humanities that hopes to
                    advance the discipline across broad academic and scholarly contexts. It will
                    succeed in its aims if it is both comprehensible to newcomers and stimulating
                    for experienced practitioners: a bridging effort, but one
                    undertaken with serious intent. It proceeds by isolating a key debate for
                    examination, describing two concepts that go a significant distance to solving
                    issues raised by that debate (but not far enough), and exploring the theoretical
                    writings of a selection of high profile digital humanists. The goal (a
                    non-trivial undertaking) is to illustrate the utility of postfoundationalism as
                    a conceptual tool, its interdependence with postindustrial culture, and the
                    light it sheds on our understanding of what DH is. If successful, the
                    article, rather than making an essentialist claim that Digital Humanities is
                        defined by postfoundational method, will constitute a contribution to
                    the developing digital humanities agenda: 
                        A field’s agenda consists of what
                            its practitioners agree ought to be done, a consensus concerning the
                            field’s problems, their order of importance, the means of solving them
                            (the tools of the trade), and perhaps most importantly, what constitutes
                            a solution. Becoming a recognized practitioner means learning the agenda
                            and helping to carry it out.
                        
                    
                
            

                The DH Moment
                In his introduction to Debates in the Digital
                        Humanities, The Digital Humanities
                        Moment, Matthew Gold notes that the practice has 
                        arrived amid larger questions
                            concerning the nature and purpose of the university system
                        
                    . As the discipline develops, these questions of cultural and intellectual
                    context are becoming both more relevant and more contested because, as insiders
                    to DH know, although multivariate the conversation returns to the same basic
                    issue again and again, making it difficult to explain (and therefore justify)
                    the field to university management. Some digital humanists view attempts to
                    divide practitioners into two separate camps as futile, but in practice it’s
                    easier to posit a simple binary opposition: if the field orients itself towards
                    text encoding, computer programming, and producing IT products it is presumed to
                    need to align towards the sciences, engineering, and empirically-oriented
                    humanities and social sciences; if it orients itself towards Theory it is
                    presumed to need to align towards literary and cultural studies. The reality is
                    far more complex than that (text encoding is a classic example, where technical
                    issues are inextricably tied to both theory and knowledge context), but it is a
                    level of complexity that’s difficult to convey to senior scholars and peers in
                    cognate disciplines and service areas, so the dichotomy assumes more
                    significance than it deserves. 
                There are some indications that the global community is incapable of pointing the
                    way to a workable compromise. Patrik Svensson has suggested that DH is a twenty-first-century humanities project
                        driven by frustration, dissatisfaction, epistemic tension, everyday
                        practice, technological vision, disciplinary challenges, institutional
                        traction, hope, ideals and strong visions — hardly a situation
                    conducive to clear articulations of intellectual purpose and antecedent . Alan Liu has admitted that he fears: 
                        the digital humanities are not ready
                            to take up their full responsibility [to reinvigorate the Humanities]
                            because the field does not yet possess an adequate critical awareness of
                            the larger social, economic, and cultural issues at stake.
                        
                     Liu’s argument is that this unpreparedness stems from a general
                    resistance to theorizing the deeper cultural significance of the discipline
                    across the DH community, in favor of building tools, systems and websites, and
                    programming code . Manfred Thaller probably wouldn’t
                    agree with that sentiment, but appears similarly frustrated about the
                    long-standing tension in the digital humanities over whether the discipline has 
                        an intellectual agenda or […]
                            constitute[s] an infrastructure
                        
                    . In sanguine voice Willard McCarty has pointed out that …complaints of stagnation and
                        theoretical poverty… have followed the discipline since at least
                    1962 . It is worth remembering in this
                    context that the older humanities computing tradition was not associated with
                    what could be termed the main currents of late twentieth
                    century intellectual culture. The heated debate surrounding Robert William Fogel
                    and Stanley L. Engerman’s Time on the Cross: The Economics
                        of American Negro Slavery (1974) provides one example of how it
                    could become enmeshed in topical debates (in this case around cliometrics, or
                    the use of quantification in economic history), but humanities computing was not
                    known for its engagement with high-profile intellectual trends. Analysis of the
                        Humanist email seminar, run by Willard McCarty
                    since 1987, backs this up . 
                This has changed in recent years as significant numbers of newcomers have joined
                    the community, resulting in sometimes-heated debates between those supporting a
                        traditional humanities computing perspective based on
                        technology as tool, and those supporting the broader
                    definition enabled by the ODH. The recent DH theory debate
                    is a case in point, and the example I have chosen to illustrate the utility of
                    postfoundationalism as a critical tool. While it is only one of several issues
                    that could be explored, it has been chosen here because it exposes a
                    particularly troubling issue. The discussion exposed the fault lines that
                    resulted from the rapid development of the humanities computing tradition into a
                    broader state-sanctioned Digital Humanities field in the United States.
                    While the locus of the debate was centered in the U.S., it resonated around the
                    international community and has particular significance for the field as it
                    expands into new regions of the world. 
                The debate’s basic elements are well rehearsed. It took place over the course of
                    two years, and was conducted primarily amongst North American university-based
                    digital humanists. In an influential talk describing digital humanists’ values,
                    given at the CUNY Digital Humanities Initiative in 2010, Tom Scheinfeldt didn’t
                    mention theory, emphasizing coding and Do It Yourself (DIY) instead . At the time his emphasis seemed unproblematic.
                    At the 2011 MLA conference in Los Angeles, however, Stephen Ramsay put a finer
                    point on the issue by asking: Do
                        you have to know how to code? I’m a tenured professor of digital humanities
                        and I say yes.
                     He followed up by opining: But if you are not making anything, you are not
                        — in my less-than-three-minute opinion — a digital humanist. Ramsay
                    later softened his position, and has produced his own significant contribution
                    to digital literary theory, but his comment brought a challenging vein of
                    digital humanities discourse into the light of day. Some people were angered,
                    and felt that such a brazen attitude opened up a space for
                    them to air mounting grievances. The assumption was that Ramsay’s comment
                    betrayed a lingering prejudice across the discipline that equated the ability to
                    write computer code with hostility to Theory. This may or may not have been an
                    unjust conflation, but for whatever reason the association of coding with
                    anti-theoretical prejudice had become a touchstone issue. 
                It’s easy for people outside the United States to forget that Alan Liu delivered
                    a paper at not only the same MLA conference as Ramsay, but also the same panel
                        . Titled Where is Cultural
                        Criticism in the Digital Humanities?
                    , it suggested that this cherished focus on more hack, less yack (focusing on
                    text encoding and computer programming at the expense of theory and cultural
                    criticism) threatened to throw away a crucial opportunity for digital humanists,
                    their students, and the wider tradition. Later in 2011 and the early months of
                    2012 the topic yielded one of the richest intellectual debates outside Humanist in the history of the discipline. The debate
                    was prompted by a blog post by a young American scholar, Natalia Cecire, who
                    disagreed with 
                        the zero-sum logic that it [an
                            emphasis on coding] implies
                        
                    . Primed by a year’s worth of discussion resulting from Ramsay and Liu’s
                    comments at the MLA in January, a slew of posts and tweets on the topic
                    dominated digital humanities discourse for several weeks, before petering out
                    with a return to the status quo: hack over yack. Most digital humanists, it
                    seems, agreed with Tom Scheinfeldt, who tweeted that 
                        DH arguments are encoded in
                            code. I disagree with the notion that those arguments must be translated
                            / re-encoded in text
                        
                    . 
                Perhaps in an acceptance that the time had come to provide a scholarly forum for
                    the debate, the first issue of the partially crowd-sourced Journal of Digital Humanities, produced by George Mason
                    University’s Roy Rosenzweig Centre for History and New Media in late 2011, was
                    devoted to the Theory problem. Natalia Cecire was invited to provide an
                    introduction, where she claimed that the hack versus yack divide had sundered
                    the connection between saying and
                        doing. Cecire claimed that hacking represented a dominant discourse
                    across the discipline that celebrated tacit knowledge and valued only 
                        embodied, experiential,
                            extradiscursive epistemology” at the expense of deeper philosophical,
                            ethical, and economic issues
                        
                    . Although a far less emotive (and important) topic, it wasn’t unlike the
                    accusations directed at cliometricians like Fogel in the previous century: a
                    claim that positivism, and especially scientism masquerading as post-positivism,
                    becomes anathema to the Humanities when it excludes more traditional methods. In
                    her piece, Jean Bauer openly stated that she was insulted by these kinds of comments, which she
                    felt betrayed a lack of understanding about the design decisions required for DH
                    products . Several other contributions were similarly
                    forthright in their defense of tacit knowledge. Fred Gibbs came closest to
                    mediating a way forward by simply pointing out that [p]art of what defines a discipline is the rhetoric
                        and aesthetics of its scholarly discourse and there are very real
                    practical needs for the development of DH-specific discourse, in order to
                    evaluate scholarly outputs and engage in other normal administrative tasks . Perhaps the most effective contribution (and
                    certainly the most concise) to that first issue of the Journal of Digital Humanities was offered in Word and Code, jointly authored by Tom Scheinfeldt and Ryan Shaw.
                    It consisted merely of Scheinfeldt’s tweet and Shaw’s reply: 
                        
                            DH arguments are encoded in code. I disagree with the notion that
                                those arguments must be translated / re-encoded in text.
                            
                                @foundhistory @ncecire If you can't explain to me in words how your
                                code works, you don't really know how it works.
                        
                        
                     The two tweets provided a summation of the hack versus yack debate in 280
                    characters, with a substantial dose of irony. 
                What’s missing here, crucially, is that the theory debate prompted by Cecire
                    probably only represented the further development within the U.S. digital
                    humanities movement (itself containing digital history, digital literary studies
                    etc.) of digital cultural studies, an event that had been presaged by the
                    pre-existence of digital media studies , and
                    should have been welcomed as a sophisticated addition to the field. The fact
                    that it wasn’t points to one of the fundamental weaknesses in the movement:
                    consistent recourse to a category error that conflates the contributing fields
                    of the digital humanities with the (extra)discipline itself. The problem usually
                    appears with the conflation of DH with digital literary studies, rather than
                    digital cultural studies, to the point where it sometimes seems as if English
                    departments are taking over the field to the detriment of
                    digital history, classics and so on. Mathew G. Kirshenbaum devoted an essay to
                    the issue in 2010. Titled What Is Digital humanities and
                        What’s It Doing in English Departments?, the piece noted that
                    English departments have historically been hospitable settings for scholars interested in
                    humanities computing, because of their natural interest in text analysis and
                    publishing . Kirschenbaum was quite
                    right in noting this can only be a positive thing given the need for
                    institutional support, but DH has also been well supported in History and
                    Classics departments and it would be improper (and perhaps even absurd) for
                    English departments to claim special ownership of the field. If this was to
                    happen there would not only be confusion about what DH is, but digital
                    historians and classists (etc.) might become unwittingly mired in the famously
                    heated debates characteristic of literary studies.
                This was precisely what happened when Stanley Fish ,
                        ,  and later Stephen
                    Marche  wrote essays objecting to the digital
                    humanities in the New York Times and LA Times respectively. It could be that they were
                    hoping to prompt a campaign of apologia pro vita sua
                    against DH, as Anthony Daniels has admitted to savoring , but they were ill-served by their sources. Both
                    writers, after presumably cursory research into the digital humanities, assumed
                    that digital humanities equated to digital literary criticism and proceeded to
                    damn the entire subject-area for the (perceived) sins of this one contributing
                    area. Their argument against digital humanities revolved around the lack of
                    benefit in quantitative text analysis rather than the utility of historical GIS,
                    concordances of ancient texts, digital variorums, or transcriptions of
                    philosophical writings. If people involved in digital literary studies were
                    perplexed at the hostility, digital humanists from other fields were left
                    wondering why eminent literary scholars were damning their field without seeming
                    to know their specific area of it even existed. A cursory glance at the book of
                    abstracts for the primary ADHO conference would have alerted Fish et al. to
                    their mistake. In many ways it was an embarrassment for American literary
                    studies, as some of their finest betrayed a tendency to engage in heated
                    polemics in ignorance of elementary facts. The problem continued at the 2013 MLA
                    conference, with one panel discussion, titled The Dark Side
                        of the Digital Humanities
                     generating ire for its participants’ conflation of DH
                    with the recent trends towards Massive Open Online Courses, or MOOCS, which
                    digital humanists have been largely uninterested in (the topic is of more
                    interest to people interested in eLearning) . 
                Category errors like these, perhaps better described through reference to the
                    parable of the blind men and the elephant, do indeed speak to an under-theorized
                    discipline: one that undermines external perceptions and internal cohesion, and
                    suggests that the field doesn’t quite know what it is. Given he has watched
                    digital humanists debating the same issue for several decades it’s telling that
                    Willard McCarty wondered in 2012 whether debates like these indicate 
                        …immaturity and lack of outward
                            reach…
                        
                     characteristic of the discipline as a whole. To some observers, and
                    despite a large number of blog posts and even a THATCamp unconference devoted to
                    the topic , it seems to some observers as if the
                    discipline is stuck in a Becktian moment 
                        …where the advocates of
                            computation and interpretation are locked in a dichotomous
                            opposition
                        
                    . 
                And yet Scheinfeldt’s tweet points to a way out of the situation. In distilling
                    decades of debate into 140 characters it presents us with a nicely reductive
                    place to initiate analysis. Contra Cecire’s claim that it amounts to zero-sum
                    logic or a felix culpa, the implication I draw is
                    that fundamental disciplinary truths must reside inside this
                    tautology: DH arguments are encoded in code. I disagree with the notion that
                        those arguments must be translated / re-encoded in text. Wittgenstein
                    might claim Scheinfeldt’s comment simultaneously says nothing and opens up a
                    whole world of interpretation. The key, of course, is finding the right tools to
                    explore this strange new world. Ultimately, of course, this article will argue
                    that postfoundationalism is one of the most satisfactory tools we have at our
                    disposal to understand it, especially when considered in the context of
                    postindustrial culture. In order to understand why, we must explore two slightly
                    less satisfactory concepts first.
            

                Immanence
                It is a fruitless exercise to imply that the digital humanities are incapable of
                    leading us towards intellectual depths as American literary critics like Fish
                    and Marche have, or that the entire field should adopt the theoretical
                    perspectives of one of its contributing disciplines (or, indeed, the theoretical
                    debates of one of its contributing countries). The knowledge domain is too
                    different from anything we’ve encountered before, and study of it too limited,
                    for us to understand what its intellectual potential might be, let alone decide
                    today what its central preoccupations should be for years into the future: it
                    is, and has been for several decades, in development. This paper suggests that,
                    given examples like that outlined above, digital humanists need to continue
                    developing a set of conceptual tools capable of exploring, in the first instance
                    at least, the hackers’ tautological stance towards code. 
                It’s easy enough to see why digital humanists have been having the same
                    conversation for decades. Despite the fact that it brings us up against some
                    difficult hermeneutic issues, code is at once our tool, our historical record,
                    and the basis of our theoretical canon. We cannot get away from it. By
                    extension, an understanding of code (the precise level of understanding is yet
                    to be defined) must be, along with knowledge of the humanities themselves, a
                        sine qua non of entry to the field. Louis Menand
                    would no doubt suggest that we are isolating this aspect of our practice as a
                    means of exceeding [our] own
                        history, as a way of defining borders and laying claim to long-term
                    existence within the academy in the same way that historians, literature
                    professors and lawyers did before us . The
                    question isn’t so much whether we are going to make such a stand, and what we’re
                    going to make it over, as to whether we have the critical tools to make the
                    stand meaningful to our peers in neighboring disciplines, and administrators
                    requesting justification for continued support. In order to do this we need to
                    start with simple concepts and move outwards: first
                        immanence, then the epistemology of
                        building.
                
                For the hacking branch of the DH community, then, which
                    appears to me to be the obviously (and appropriately) dominant branch of the
                    discipline, computer code is immanent. The Software Studies and Critical Code
                    communities (themselves part of the DH community in the broader definition
                    offered by Brett Bobley) have done considerable work on this subject ; ; ; ; , but in simple terms it is easy to illustrate what
                    this means. One of the signal DH publications of 2011 used facial recognition to
                        recover the public identities of thousands of
                    nineteenth-century Chinese Australian immigrants previously hidden in a massive
                    archival stack at the National Archives of Australia. Tim Sherratt’s single
                    webpage, titled the real face of white Australia
                    , is self-explanatory. The real interest for
                    digital humanists was in his accompanying explanatory blog post , and the two Python scripts he posted on his
                    public Github account . 

                
                    Script 1. extract_faces.py
                    #!/usr/bin/python 
# Loop through images and feed to facial detection script
import os 
import face_detect 
#rootdir = "/home/tim/mycode/recordsearch/src/recordsearchtools/files/E752" 
rootdir = "/home/tim/mycode/recordsearch/src/recordsearchtools/files/ST84-1" 
#rootdir = "/home/tim/mycode/recordsearch/src/recordsearchtools/files/test" 
#rootdir = "/home/tim/mycode/recordsearch/src/recordsearchtools/files/ST84-1/1907-391-400-[1731871]"
for root, dirs, files in os.walk(rootdir, topdown=True): 
	for file in files:
			print 'Processing %s' % file 
		face_detect.process_image(os.path.join(root, file))
                


                
                    Script 2. face_detect.py
                    #!/usr/bin/python 
# face_detect.py 
# Face Detection using OpenCV. Based on script at: 
# http://creatingwithcode.com/howto/face-detection-in-static-images-with-python/ 
# Usage: python face_detect.py [image filename] 
import sys,os 
from opencv.cv import * 
from opencv.highgui import * 
from PIL import Image, ImageOps 
CLASSIFIER = '/usr/share/doc/opencv-doc/examples/haarcascades/haarcascade_frontalface_default.xml' 
CROP_DIR = '/home/tim/mycode/recordsearch/src/recordsearchtools/files/crops' 
def detect_objects(fn, image): 
	"""Detects faces and then crops the image.""" 
	#grayscale = cvCreateImage(cvSize(image.width, image.height), 8, 1) 
	#cvCvtColor(image, grayscale, CV_BGR2GRAY) 
	
	storage = cvCreateMemStorage(0) 
	cvClearMemStorage(storage) 
	#cvEqualizeHist(grayscale, grayscale) 
	cascade = cvLoadHaarClassifierCascade(CLASSIFIER, cvSize(1,1)) 
	faces = cvHaarDetectObjects(image, cascade, storage, 1.3, 3, 
CV_HAAR_DO_CANNY_PRUNING, cvSize(20,20)) 
	if faces: 
		i = 1 
		for f in faces: 
			#newfn = fn + ".output.jpg" 
			#os.system("convert %s -stroke red -fill none -draw 'rectangle %d,%d %d,%d' %s" % (fn, f.x, f.y, f.x+f.width, f.y+f.height, newfn)) 
			#os.system("mv %s %s.orig" % (fn, fn)) 
			#os.system("mv %s %s" % (newfn, fn)) 
			#print("[(%d,%d) -> (%d,%d)]" % (f.x, f.y, f.x+f.width, f.y+f.height)) 
			file, ext = os.path.splitext(fn) 
			im = Image.open(fn) 
			# Increase selected area by 50px on each side then crop 
			im = im.crop((f.x-50, f.y-50, f.x+f.width+50, f.y+f.height+50)) 
			# Minor contrast adjustment 
			im = ImageOps.autocontrast(im, cutoff=0.5) 
			im.load() 
			crop = '%s/%s_crop_%s.jpg' % (CROP_DIR, os.path.basename(file), i) 
			im.save(crop, "JPEG") 
			check_crop(crop) 
			i += 1 
def check_crop(crop): 
	"""Try to reduce false positives by doing a second pass and deleting images that fail.""" 
	image = cvLoadImage(crop); 
	storage = cvCreateMemStorage(0) 
	cvClearMemStorage(storage) 
	cascade = cvLoadHaarClassifierCascade(CLASSIFIER, cvSize(1,1)) 
	faces = cvHaarDetectObjects(image, cascade, storage, 1.3, 3, CV_HAAR_DO_CANNY_PRUNING, cvSize(20,20)) 
	if faces: 
		if faces[0] is None: 
			os.remove(crop) 
		else: 
			os.remove(crop) 
def process_image(fn): 
	image = cvLoadImage(fn); 
	detect_objects(fn, image) 
def main(): 
	image = cvLoadImage(sys.argv[1]); 
	detect_objects(sys.argv[1], image) 
	if __name__ == "__main__": 
		main() 
                
                For a DH hacker these scripts are rich in humanist detail,
                    from the cultural phenomenon that is Github, to the problems posed by finding
                    and visualizing sources within very large datasets, to the open source code
                    movement that underpins DH and prompted Sherratt to post the code in an online
                    forum, to the referencing of the scripts he used (not only due to licensing
                    requirements but to show his colleagues how easy his task
                    was, using code from http://opencv.org/
                    and adapting it to his purpose). This isn’t to mention the background to the
                    Python scripting language, its suitability for entry-level programming and its
                    widespread adoption and centrality to early 21st
                    century digital products. And like coffee stains in a book margin, we find in
                    the extract_faces.py configuration script references to
                        "/home/tim/mycode, suggesting the work was done not on a
                    proprietary Windows or OSX operating system, but on an open source Linux
                    machine. If the term code is read in even broader terms than this, as a
                    metaphor for a thorough-going understanding of how digital culture is engineered
                    (data architecture and packetization, the nature of databases and networks, the
                    nature of programming languages etc.) it is possible to see even more
                    possibilities, at the point where DH intersects with not only computer science,
                    but the History of Technology, Software Studies, and Science and Technology
                    Studies (STS). In 10 PRINT CHR$(205.5+RND(1)); : GOTO
                        10 Nick Montfort et al. point out that attempts like these, to
                    position 
                        the program’s output in a space
                            of symbolic meanings and design principles…
                        
                     offer rich new interpretative possibilities, but it is equally important
                    to recognize that at some level source code will always remain impenetrable, or 
                        spectral
                        
                    . Such is the complexity of modern computing that it has become impossible
                    for a single person — even the author (in the event there is a single author) —
                    to grasp what’s going on as functions are called, libraries unpacked, and
                    voltage levels set within logic gates. The reading above ignores these issues
                    and the mechanics of the code itself, but it perhaps indicates some of the
                    mountainous interpretative possibilities inherent in the lines of code being
                    created by digital humanists. 
            

                The Epistemology of Building
                While the immanence of computer code provides justification to scholars involved
                    in Software Studies, and digital humanists aware that field is either cognate or
                    part of the broader tent depending on their definitional
                    stance, it doesn’t provide a lot of justification for digital humanists seeking
                    evidence that the more technical kinds of digital humanities outputs should be
                    accepted for scholarly assessment. It either relies on techniques of source
                    criticism practiced by a range of humanist disciplines, or merely states the
                    obvious point that people who can write code can also read and interpret it. In
                    order to justify technical outputs as worthy of assessment digital humanists
                    would be more advised to refer to an approach once outlined by Willard McCarty
                    in Humanities Computing (2005), augmented by
                    comments in Humanist and journal articles 
                    . 
                McCarty’s comments may well represent first use, but my
                    purpose here is not to establish an eponymous origin. My purpose is to suggest
                    that his cognitive stance has become so widespread it represents a
                        habit of mind or, mentalité,
                    that reflects the goals and aspirations of a significant portion of the
                    community, including Franco Moretti (2005), Julia Flanders (2009; 2012), Galey
                    and Ruecker (2010), Ramsay and Rockwell (2012) and several others. The
                    implications of the stance are fascinating. In extended commentaries later
                    encapsulated in Scheinfeldt’s epigrammatic tweet, McCarty suggests that theories
                    of computer coding, modeling and design are capable of providing an
                    epistemological basis for the digital humanities; that rather than being mere
                    by-products of the development process, they 
                        contain arguments that
                            advance knowledge about the world
                        
                    . The argument proffered is that the need to create models of reality
                    (ontologies, database schemas, algorithms and so on), required to allow
                    computers to mathematically parse problems posed by their human operators,
                    offers a radical new methodological basis for future humanities research. Rather
                    than being merely an indication of computers’ inability to accommodate the
                    complexities of human thought and emotion, and by extension historical reality,
                    the suggestion is that the very inadequacies of the models — their propensity to
                    be radically inadequate, or at best only broadly reliable — suggest a new way of
                    looking at the world that is at once accepting of failure, more in tune with
                    scientific method, and oriented towards process instead of Truth: 
                        Computational form, which accepts
                            only that which can be told with programmatic explicitness and
                            precision, is thus radically inadequate for representing the full range
                            of knowledge — hence useful for locating what gets lost when we try to
                            specify the unspecifiable.
                        
                     Ramsay and Rockwell interpret this to mean that we need to develop a
                        humanistically
                        informed theory of the making of technology, an
                    epistemology of building that provides scholarly justification for DH outputs in
                    a way that makes sense to our peers in cognate disciplines . 
                Although there are notable exceptions, such as McCarty’s modeling of Ovid’s
                        Metamorphosis
                    , the problem with attempts to define an
                    epistemology of building is that they threaten to float free of the broader
                    humanities tradition. Commentators like Liu and Cecire might argue that, as
                    Allen Tate said of the American Southern Critics, they are locked in the present
                    and cut off from the 
                        benefit of the fund of traditional
                            wisdom
                        
                     that has dealt with similar problems before. Without arguing specifically
                    for more critical or cultural theory, David Berry suggests something similar
                    when he comments that digital humanists need to problematize 
                        what Lakatos (1980) would have
                            called the hard-core of the humanities, the unspoken assumptions
                            and ontological foundations which support the ‘normal’ research that
                            humanities scholars undertake on an everyday basis.
                        
                     Following this line of argument, which is a powerful one, arguments for
                    more or less critical or cultural theory are simply components of a larger
                    problem. The hack versus yack debate means little in the context of a
                    2000-year-old tradition, after all. This isn’t to criticize the many excellent
                    scholars who have contributed to the discipline over the decades, or to ignore
                    the growing body of work (much of it cited in this article) that suggests growth
                    towards what Lakatos terms the ‘hard-core’ humanities. Any digital humanist who
                    has spent a considerable amount of time staring at code to work out a particular
                    problem will understand why this is easier said than done: the conceptual divide
                    that separates Computer Science and the Humanities is large, and it is natural
                    to only think in one of the two paradigms at any one time. Digital humanists
                    need bridging concepts, or concepts that work just as well for the digital
                    humanities as their analog cousins — levers capable of raising our conceptual
                    understanding to new levels.
            

                Postfoundationalism
                Postfoundationalism holds promise as one of these levers. Although it is only one
                    of several that will be required, it offers our nascent epistemology
                        of building a useful tool. Mark Bevir points out that for
                    historians postfoundationalism has the great benefit of avoiding the simplistic
                    anchoring of explanation in pre-determined facts as with
                    modernist discourse, or the dissolution of fact into fiction characteristic of
                    postmodernism. Postfoundationalism asserts that there is no point asserting
                    either more confidence in our understanding of reality than is justified (as
                    with modernism and logical empiricism) or retreating into a pessimistic view of
                    our ability to grasp any one reality at all (as with postmodernism and
                    postmodern deconstruction) . Rather, in a
                    claim that could perhaps be criticized for claiming to have cut the Gordian
                    knot, postfoundationalism 
                        reject[s] the possibility of facts
                            outside theoretical contexts. All knowledge incorporates both facts and
                            theories
                        
                    . It is an intellectual position that balances a distrust of grand
                    narrative with an acceptance that methods honed over centuries and supported by
                    independently verified evidence can lead, if not to Truth itself, then closer to
                    it than we were before. Philosopher of science Dimitri Ginev notes that
                    postfoundationalism offers both a hermeneutic ontology of existence and a hermeneutic theory of
                        historicity, and buttresses itself by asserting the validity of both
                    the research process and the outputs of that research process . Revealingly, Paul Healy suggests that
                    postfoundational rationality aims to develop a situated learning process conducive to the
                    accretion of knowledge, rather than either positivist or relativist 
                        idealisations
                        
                    . Its devotees hope that it is capable of moving human knowledge and
                    understanding beyond the 
                        just in time, conflicted
                        
                     postmodern historicism described by Alan Liu towards something equally
                    accepting of complexity, but more optimistic and empirically oriented. Healy
                    neatly summarizes the resulting communicative domain in terms of disciplines
                    embracing 
                        a robust context-transcendent truth
                            standard which, in virtue of preserving the ‘aporetic tension’ inherent
                            in the distinction between what is true and what we hold to be true,
                            suffices to ensure that proffered knowledge claims are held open to
                            critical scrutiny in an indefinitely extended array of situated
                            forums.
                        
                    
                
                The approach would seem to be well suited to a (trans)discipline like Digital
                    Humanities that runs the gamut from empirically oriented text analysis to the
                    development of database models and cultural critique. It could well be, because
                    it is a field so reliant on a similar hermeneutic, that the digital humanities
                    prove important to the development of postfoundationalism in the coming decades.
                    In straddling the humanities and computer science, and using methods derived
                    from fields as diverse as computational linguistics and sociology, its
                    practitioners are confronted with a need to re-envisage the nature and goals of
                    humanistic enquiry and method, in order to make sense of the radically different
                    questions they’re being confronted with. It makes sense to seek out different
                    new approaches to assist them in that task. Although it is essential that the
                    discipline looks to fields like computer science (and perhaps mathematics and
                    logic) before reinventing the wheel, the basic assumption must surely be that a
                    new problem domain is likely to require new theories as well as new methods. And
                    the parallels between emerging DH theory and postfoundationalism are easy to
                    illustrate. 
                Few statements of method could suggest a postfoundational orientation better than
                    McCarty’s comment that 
                        computational models, however
                            finely perfect, are better understood as temporary states in a
                                process of coming to know rather than fixed structures of
                            knowledge
                        
                    , or his later point that 
                        the word 
                                computing
                             is a participle — a verbal injunctive that turns things into
                            algorithmic performances
                        
                    , requiring attention to an ongoing process of iterative modeling rather
                    than final outcomes. By meditating on the procedures involved in the production
                    of electronic texts, from the inscription of bits onto hard-drive platters, to
                    their abstraction in machine code, assembly language and higher level
                    programming languages, to presentation on our screens, Matthew G. Kirschenbaum
                    offers what could be seen as a postfoundationalist argument for critical
                    exegesis focused on process, propagation, and becoming, rather than the fixity of texts, screen,
                    or image: 
                        New media cannot be studied
                            apart from individual instances of inscription, object, and code as they
                            propagate on, across, and through storage devices, operating systems,
                            software environments, and network protocols …
                        
                     Such an interpretation works equally well for a writer like Stephen
                    Ramsay, who 
                        tries to locate a hermeneutics at
                            the boundary between mechanism and theory
                        
                    , pointing out that 
                        [T]he stratum that we lodge
                            ourselves upon with algorithmic criticism is one in which both results
                            and the textual generation of results are systematically manipulated and
                            transformed, connected and reconnected with unlike things.
                        
                     Peter Lunenfeld et al. suggest that the discipline needs to engage with design as a method of
                        thinking-through-practice: 
                        Digital Humanities is a
                            production-based endeavor in which theoretical issues get tested in the
                            design of implementations, and implementations are loci of theoretical
                            reflection and elaboration.
                        
                     Franco Moretti offers something similar when he notes that for him 
                        [The map itself is not an]
                            explanation, of course: but at least, it offers a model of the narrative
                            universe which rearranges its components in a non-trivial way, and may
                            bring some hidden patterns to the surface.
                        
                     Extending the theme into the materialist world of the hard drive platters
                    and inscribed bits that mediate the manipulation of digitized sources, William
                    Turkel suggests digital humanists would be well-served to think 
                        in terms of
                                transduction, the conversion of energy from one form to
                            another
                        
                    . In their introduction to the Journal of Digital
                        Humanities special issue devoted to topic modeling, Elijah Meeks and
                    Scott Weingart note that: 
                        [I]n digital humanities
                            research we use tools, make tools, and theorize tools not because we are
                            all information scientists, but because tools are the formal
                            instantiation of methods.
                        
                    
                
                It would presumably be possible to find more examples, and others that adopt a
                    quite different stance, but in this article it is only my intention to draw
                    attention to a broad habit of mind or mentalité —
                    enough to justify further exploration — not to assert that postfoundationalism
                    should represent the definitional sine qua non for
                    the field. That argument could perhaps be attempted, but it would require a
                    book-length study and even then be difficult to avoid regression into a
                    totalizing discourse. The point is more that the statements above suggest a
                    broadly accepted vision of interpretation as praxis as much as practice,
                    engagement with a process of continuous methodological and, yes, theoretical
                    refinement that produces research outputs as snapshots of an ongoing activity
                    rather than the culmination of completed research.
                    Postfoundationalism offers a way to package these impulses together momentarily,
                    in order to consider their collective implications.
                There is something in postfoundationalism (in its secular articulation at
                        least), Postfoundationalism is also associated with postmodern
                        theology. The general epistemological stance (its approach to the validation
                        of Truth claims) in that strain is very similar to the
                        secular versions discussed in this article, but its ontological orientation
                        places it outside the scope of this article.  which resonates with
                    the epistemological stance adopted by a range of digital humanists.
                    Scheinfeldt’s tweet suggesting the immanence of code, Sherratt’s webpage,
                    McCarty’s models, Kirschenbaum’s digital forensics, Ramsay and Rockwell’s
                    epistemology of building, Moretti’s maps, Ramsay’s algorithmic criticism,
                    Turkel’s transduction, Meeks and
                    Weingart’s topic models — these are all examples that sit nicely with the
                    postfoundational stance because they speak to the immanence of knowledge, the
                    significance of its built nature, its coherence not within external facts or
                    contrived narratives but within webs of structure and meaning driven forward by
                    an iterative process, or praxis, of constant becoming. Research methods thus
                    come to include the development of ontologies, schemas, authority control
                    systems, algorithms, scripts, websites, databases and other digital tools that
                    act as grist to an ongoing dialectic between reality, representation, and
                    understanding. Any supporting theoretical corpus would focus on the principles
                    and critical tools that sharpen and refine those methods. 
                This approach has significant implications for the broader humanities tradition.
                    By rejecting certain kinds of digital output as being alien to the humanities,
                    or simply not valid research, is to cut short a process that has the ability to
                    provide deep insights into our human world, and to adopt a depressingly
                    short-sighted and pessimistic view of the opportunities provided by digital
                    tools and methods. Opposition to them betrays an essentialist understanding of
                    what kinds of knowledge and meaning-production are valid, in much the same way
                    that scientistic claims function . It is this
                    kind of logic which has led the University of Canterbury Library to accept the
                    deposition of the ontology for the UC CEISMIC Digital Archive into its
                    institutional repository. At the time of writing the ontology was being
                        edited in preparation for formal deposit.  Although it is by no means
                    a normal output for a humanities research team, it is accepted that it is a both
                    a contribution to knowledge, and one that scholars need to be able to reference
                    and critique. 
            

                Postindustrial Culture
                Postfoundationalism appears to be a common epistemological stance amongst digital
                    humanists, and a useful critical tool to help communicate to administrators the
                    scholarly value of technical digital humanities outputs, but it can also help
                    explore and communicate the relationship of the digital humanities to wider
                    postindustrial culture. In doing so it helps explain the less
                    technical, more politically and theoretically oriented, instantiations of the
                    field, making it at once a powerful explanatory tool (it can help define both
                    narrow and broad definitions of the field) and a potentially dangerous one (it
                    could be latched upon as the rather than a way to
                    define the field). 
                The political implications of digital humanists’ postfoundational orientation can
                    be seen in the development of the #alt-ac, or alternative academic
                        career movement. #alt-ac began when Brian Croxall, a digital
                    humanist and adjunct faculty member at Emory University, had a colleague deliver
                    a paper for him at the 2009 MLA in absentia because he couldn’t afford to
                    attend. Titled The Absent Presence: Today’s Faculty
                    , the paper outlined the difficult job search
                    process Croxall had been through, and the unfairness implicit in the American
                    university system, which positions adjunct faculty as the waste product of graduate education . The paper and accompanying blog post generated a
                    storm of interest on Twitter and prompted a conversation about alternative
                    academic careers on that service between Bethany Nowviskie of the University of
                    Virginia’s DH Scholar’s Lab and Jason Rhody from
                    the National Endowment for the Humanities. They proposed the #alt-ac hashtag be
                    used to capture conversations about alternative academic
                    careers, and Nowviskie later established #Alt-Academy, an online collection of
                    essays about the subject. The digital humanities community, though their use of
                    Twitter, had prompted a significant protest against an unfair academic system,
                    and given voice to a large body of disenfranchised but important stakeholders.
                    The #alt-ac community continues to educate and advocate for change in both the
                    orientation of graduate students’ job searches, and the attitude of American
                    universities to adjunct faculty. 
                It needs to be remembered that Twitter was by no means an accepted part of
                    academic culture in 2009; indeed, its appearance was met with similar concern
                    about the end of intellectual life as accompanied Wikipedia earlier in the
                    decade. Its use was being spear-headed by digital humanists who, rather than
                    seeing it as a threat to intellectual integrity and the ability of people to
                    read extended passages of prose, chose to view it as merely another useful
                    technology that could be used as part of their broader process: the service was
                    used by digital humanists to offset their geographic dispersal, share ideas and
                    new tools, and build an online community. In 2010, Tom Scheinfeldt went so far
                    as to point out that the use of services like Twitter went beyond the quotidian,
                    and were actually contributing to the development of a radically new mindset: 
                        In as much as digital
                            humanities is an Internet-based social network, it should come as no
                            surprise that digital humanities looks a lot like the Internet itself.
                            Digital humanities takes more than tools from the Internet. It works
                            like the Internet. It takes its values from the Internet.
                        
                     Digital Humanities is not only characterized by the use of
                    tools like Twitter (along with code, databases, ontologies etc.), it is
                    constituted by them; the discipline assimilates digital tools and methods to the
                    point where they become the thing itself. This is, of course, exactly what we
                    should expect in bringing technology into such a fundamental relationship to
                    scholarly activity. As Heidegger noted in 1949, technology is more than mere
                        techne, or practical art: 
                        the manufacture and utilization
                            of equipment, tools, and machines, the manufactured and used things
                            themselves, and the needs and ends that they serve, all belong to what
                            technology is. Technology itself is a contrivance — in Latin, an instrumentum.
                        
                     As Galey and Ruecker noted in their contribution to the DH discussion
                    about the epistemology of building, tools like Twitter ‘contain arguments that
                    advance knowledge about the world’. In assimilating them into fundamental
                    humanistic practice, to the point where understanding of their essential
                    (engineered) nature is a requirement of participation in the debate, digital
                    humanists are engaging in a postfoundational process with far-reaching
                    consequences. A similar argument can be made for the fringe DH activity of
                    contributing to post-disaster cultural heritage archiving and recovery,
                    expressed in projects like the September 11 Digital
                        Archive
                    , the Hurricane Digital Memory
                        Bank
                    , the UC CEISMIC Canterbury
                        Earthquakes Digital Archive
                    , and Our Marathon: The Boston
                        Bombing Digital Archive
                    . Although not the first thing people would expect
                    humanists to become involved in, it doesn’t take much thought to realize that
                    the interventions of these teams was informed by a range of humanist thinking —
                    about civic responsibility, the importance of cultural memory, public history,
                    engaged scholarship — and that were it not for them significant amounts of
                    valuable cultural heritage content would have been lost. The teams’ scholarly
                    knowledge was put to use via postfoundational methods that resulted in
                    significant contributions to national and international culture. 
                As disaster archiving and the development of the #alt-ac community suggests, a
                    growth in postfoundational method has developed coextensively with digital
                    humanities discourse entering the broader public domain. In the American context
                    it might even be reasonable to suggest the growth in postfoundational method has
                        resulted in an increase in participation in the public domain.
                        Prof Hacker, a blog devoted to trends in higher
                    education and technology started after a THATCamp unconference, was hosted by
                    the Chronicle of Higher Education in September of
                    2009. At about the same time articles about both the digital humanities and the
                    general state of graduate education began to appear in trade and IT
                    publications. Articles about the 2011 MLA published in The
                        Chronicle of Higher Education on subsequent days heightened
                    interest. William Pannapacker’s Digital Humanities
                        Triumphant? described the intense interest in digital humanities
                    sessions at that conference, prompting Fish’s series in the New York Times in response .
                    Jennifer Howard focused her attention on the digital humanities and #alt-ac
                    movements, exploring the connections between them .
                    At the same conference, Alan Liu announced the publication of 4Humanities, a web community designed to harness the
                    interest for the benefit of the humanities. 4Humanities is overt about its role as critic and conscience of
                    contemporary culture, with a special focus on the effect postindustrial culture
                    is having on the arts and humanities. The connection between DH and advocacy is
                    made explicit on the Mission page: 4Humanities began because the digital
                        humanities community — which specializes in making creative use of digital
                        technology to advance humanities research and teaching as well as to think
                        about the basic nature of the new media and technologies — woke up to its
                        special potential and responsibility to assist humanities advocacy.  The
                        digital humanities are increasingly integrated in the humanities at large. 
                        They catch the eye of administrators and funding agencies who otherwise
                        dismiss the humanities as yesterday’s news.  They connect across disciplines
                        with science and engineering fields.  They have the potential to use new
                        technologies to help the humanities communicate with, and adapt to,
                        contemporary society. These projects have been added to by The Praxis Network, Disclaimer: The author is a
                        member of this project.  a group of 
                        allied but
                            differently-inflected humanities education initiatives… engaged in
                            rethinking pedagogy and campus partnerships in relation to the
                            digital
                        
                     and ADHO Special Interest Groups like Global
                        Outlook: Digital Humanities (ADHO, 2013-), which seeks to assist in
                    the equitable global development of digital humanities as a field. 
                
                    Transform DH
                     and Postcolonial Digital
                        Humanities
                     occupy more overtly theoretical territory,
                    using critical theory to deconstruct the white, middle-class, and straight
                    nature of the Digital Humanities and press for more inclusive attitudes. These
                    projects deploy critical theory in opposition to what they feel is blindness
                    within the discipline to significant inequities across racial, gender, class and
                    sexual boundaries, but pay close attention to the built layers of technologies.
                    Their attitude was summed up at a paper delivered at Digital Humanities 2013,
                    titled Digital Humanities: Egalitarian or the New
                        Elite?, where a variety of speakers outlined the work — technical,
                    theoretical, and political — required to ensure the community’s claims of
                    inclusiveness are supported by actions, technical standards and protocols . 
                Just as Software Studies and Critical Code brushed up against my discussion of
                    immanence, so this part of the digital humanities brushes up against projects
                    like the Humanities, Arts, Science and Technology Alliance
                        Collaboratory
                     and the Fembot
                        Collective
                    , and the vast terrain explored in Science and
                    Technology Studies, Cultural Studies and New Media. This isn’t to mention the
                    long-standing connection between the digital humanities and the open access
                    movement, symbolized in projects like Open Humanities
                        Press
                     and Press Forward
                     but reaching far deeper, into relationships with
                    leading digital presses at M.I.T. and Michigan University, and connections into
                    library science and scholarly communication networks like Media Commons: A Digital Scholarly Network
                    . It would no doubt be possible to continue
                    surfacing relevant examples, but it is enough to note that over the course of a
                    decade, from around 2001–2011, the digital humanities have moved from an
                    emphasis on technique (represented in the humanities computing tradition) to a
                    blended 
                        extra-disciplinary
                        
                     praxis involving a continuum that ranges from purely technical work to
                    new media and political advocacy. This process has caused significant and
                    understandable tension; the stakeholder community has struggled to deploy
                    conceptual tools capable of accommodating such a rapidly expanding audience. 
                My feeling is that this tension stems from discomfort at the extension of the
                    field towards cognate disciplines that are often deeply critical of the very
                    technologies digital humanists rely on. The critical pressure that has been
                    applied through exposure to these disciplines has resulted in the culturally and
                    critically engaged projects outlined above, which indicate an acceptance of the
                    field’s complex relationship to postindustrial culture. This is unsurprising
                    given the backgrounds of some of the scholars involved in them. Before
                    establishing 4Humanities Alan Liu explored the
                    relationship between the Humanities and postindustrial culture in The Laws of Cool: Knowledge Work and the Culture of
                        Information, arguing that postindustrialism is a technological rationality that has led to
                    the usurpation of the knowledge economy by corporate interests and threatens 
                        …the death of knowledge in the
                            information age
                        
                    . He argued that this has shifted the context for the humanities into
                    corporate environments, requiring new analytical techniques, and new research
                    agendas focused on the analysis of corporate culture and power. 4Humanities reflects a response to this insight,
                    actively countering myths benefitting postindustrial technocrats with evidence
                    from within the Humanities themselves, but anxieties remain. 
                At the 2013 MLA Wendy Hui Kyong Chun delivered a talk titled The Dark Side of the Digital Humanities, which pointed out the
                    paradox of a supposedly booming new discipline producing insecure jobs, lacking
                    scholarly recognition, and requiring a constant search for funding. Chun claimed
                    she wasn’t criticizing the Digital Humanities so much as the general euphoria surrounding technology and
                        education and the vapid embrace of
                        the digital that feeds into the corporatism critiqued by Liu. Her
                    compelling argument was that the heightened interest in the digital humanities
                    (the development of a bandwagon) 
                        …allows us to believe that the
                            problem facing our students and our profession is a lack of technical
                            savvy rather than an economic system that undermines the future of our
                            students
                        
                    . Chun’s talk provided a moment of stuplimity, a word
                    coined by Sianne Ngai to refer to those peculiarly modern moments when
                    wonderment gives way to an extended duration of
                        consecutive fatigues: 
                        As in the case of the repeated
                            pratfalls of the slapstick comedian, stuplimity emerges in the
                            performance of such fatigue-inducing strategies, in which the gradual
                            accumulation of error often leads to the repetition of a refrain: too
                                strong; or something wrong there.
                        
                        
                     Chun was articulating specific concerns, but they were informed by an
                    awareness of the kind of cultural critique practiced by Liu. She was pointing
                    out that the hype associated with the digital humanities shouldn’t (or shouldn’t
                    be allowed to) hide the fact that the field is as pressured as any other in the
                    arts and humanities by technocratic tendencies and a drift towards corporatism
                    within universities.
                The field’s attitude to this situation — being beset by the same pressures that
                    threaten the broader tradition — could define its future. Rejecting the insights
                    offered by political and cultural theory risks complicity with troubling aspects
                    of the contemporary world ; ; . [S]unny prognostications about a
                    technologically-enabled future of emancipated knowledge workers and efficient
                    markets have been undermined not only by the growth of large multinational
                    technology companies, but unfair labor practices that have all too familiar
                    parallels in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries . As Foucault pointed out, technical forms of knowledge not only
                    influence the organization of corporate culture, but social life and norms of
                    conduct as well, making cognizance of the issues even more pressing . In another piece of writing Chun goes so
                    far as to suggest we have entered a period where long-standing enlightenment
                    definitions of personal identity and governmentality have been radically altered
                        . 
                Experienced digital humanists are aware of the issues. As Julia Flanders puts it, 
                        [d]igital humanities projects
                            take place, strikingly, in a universe constrained by a set of technical
                            norms that govern the informational and operational behavior of the
                            digital environment
                        
                    . Just as a builder needs her tools, then, so she needs access to ethical
                    guidelines and informed design histories to avoid contributing to (or merely
                    providing more reason to resist) the negative social and economic effects of
                    contemporary technology. This brings to mind the work of writers like Chun ;  and Anne Balsamo , who consider the intersection between software,
                    design philosophy, identity, and engineering. These writers offer crucial
                    insights into the digital age, and need to be included within digital humanists’
                    worldview so they can provide input into postfoundational methods. The same can
                    be said for the many authors who have produced books and articles on the history
                    of computing, and historians of technology generally. This is a very well
                    established field, served by an excellent professional body (the Society for the
                    History of Technology, or SHOT, established in 1958). Efforts should be made to
                    understand where synergies between it and DH lie, especially regarding the
                    concept of materiality and the socio-cultural impact of digital technologies,
                    but also in relation to pedagogy and research goals.
                If these insights are grafted onto the turn to code-craft
                    signaled at the NEH funded “Speaking in Code”
                    workshop in November 2013, the field will have a powerful toolkit at its
                    disposal. Although nascent, this craft movement holds great
                    promise as a means of expressing postfoundational methods through a guild or
                    trade-based approach that emphasizes building and experimentation. The stated
                    goal of the workshop can be described as postfoundational in its desire to 
                        give voice to what is almost
                            always tacitly expressed in our work: expert knowledge about the
                            intellectual and interpretive dimensions of DH code-craft, and unspoken
                            understandings about the relation of that work to ethics, scholarly
                            method, and humanities theory
                        
                    . The initiative is exciting: the goal appears to be to tease out theory
                    and method from a hermeneutic of practice. This aligns very nicely to what this
                    article describes as postfoundational method.
                The problem, as always, is accommodating and being informed by views ranging from
                    a focus on code-craft to the theoretically informed critique of Chun, Balsamo et
                    al. Some efforts must be made, and ideally some intellectual levers must be
                    found, to help bridge the gap. Andrew Prescott notes that digital humanists are
                    well positioned to understand that knowledge is
                        being turned into a commodity, a data steam disconnected from those who
                        produce it and turned to commercial advantage by monopolistic
                        corporations. In arguing for the necessity of the field, he suggests
                    that 
                        …if humanities scholars wish to
                            ensure that their understanding and engagement with human knowledge does
                            not become another Californian commodity, it is essential to engage with
                            the digital world, and not as consumers but as creators
                        
                    . Conversely, it seems logical to argue along with Liu that the opposite
                    is also true: that digital humanists involved in building technologies should be
                    aware of the critiques of the cultural, economic and political domains they
                    might seek to retain intellectual freedom from. 
                It’s important to acknowledge, though, that rather than rejecting insights
                    produced through cultural critique, many of the projects referred to in this
                    article are designed as active instantiations of them. Put another way, we could
                    note that there might not be significant cause for concern: postfoundational DH
                    method appears to function surprisingly well against issues presented by
                    postindustrial culture. Not all DH projects are politically motivated — and we
                    could perhaps hope that the bulk of focus remains on traditional topics like
                    scholarly editions, concordances and archives, because this is where the
                    discipline’s main service to the tradition lies — but the more politically
                    motivated projects appear to revel in the knowledge that digital humanists’
                    felicity with the manipulation of the postindustrial system’s symbolic
                        architecture (computer code, and the ICT discourses associated
                    with the production and maintenance of not only that, but the system’s broader
                    culture and politics) offers a power that should be mobilized for the common
                    good. Their understanding of the engineered nature of the postindustrial world
                    (their facility with the code that powers its key engines, their ability to
                    build a server rather than be beholden to the dictates of an IT service desk,
                    their ability to do things cost-free) gives them insight into the world of
                        informational capitalism. The targeted success of the
                    projects is due to the realization that 
                        [i]n the new, informational mode
                            of development the source of productivity lies in the technology of
                            knowledge generation, information processing, and symbolic
                            communication
                        
                    . 
                This isn’t hack versus yack, it’s hack then act. The projects align extremely
                    well to the goals of more theoretically inclined humanists and evince awareness
                    of the cultural and ideological implications of the technology industry . Indeed, rather than being anti-theoretical,
                    the projects described above merely suggest a commitment to post (as opposed to
                    anti) foundationalism. They indicate attempts to use the tools, paradigms, and concepts of digital
                        technologies to help rethink the idea of instrumentality for the
                    Humanities as a whole . They aim to use the
                    insights gained from saturation in technical contexts for the greater good of
                    the tradition, politicizing insights gained through postfoundational method and
                    mobilizing them against the aspects of postindustrial capitalism that threaten
                    (and homogenize) the broader arts and humanities community. Historian of
                    technology Rosalind Williams might suggest they have decided that when culture is no longer an outer
                        shell of context, but is part of the machine radically new methods
                    of engagement and scholarly production are required . Whether production ends with the development of a schema, a
                    data model, a website, a scholarly edition, a journal article or a monograph
                    should matter less than the fact that production has occurred at all.
            
