Title:  A Text Network
               Analysis of Discursive Changes in German, Austrian and Swiss New Year’s Speeches
               2000-2021
Volume:  016
Issue:  1
Date:  04 February 2022
Abstract:  
            
            New Year’s speeches held by leading politicians–mostly prime ministers or
               presidents–have a long and firm tradition in Europe and have become an institution
               instead of being a crowing event for conciliatory efforts. From the perspective of
               political communication, New Year’s speeches fulfil a triple function in the
               intersection of the past, the present and the future. First, they summarise the past
               year from the perspective of the political leadership and, hence, recall, reconstruct
               and remind the most important events of the year. Second, New Year’s speeches
               describe the present and, thus, can be understood and analysed as reality
               constructions, as windows to the current state of affairs. And third, New Year’s
               speeches serve as road maps to the future, into the new year. In this sense, a New
               Year’s speeches summarises the most important future challenges, expectations and
               opportunities. 
            This article stems from the assumption that a nonlinear analysis of textual data
               based on network analysis could provide us with new ontological understanding about
               structural coherence and holes within a document corpora. It adopts a different
               viewpoint to discourse analysis based on social network analysis. The paper
               introduces a nonlinear way to analyse texts as networks in order to visualise and
               analyse how concepts are connected and to explore structural closeness and holes
               within a corpus of unstructured textual documents.
            The results indicate a discursive turn in Germany, Austria and Switzerland after the
               breakout of the global financial crisis in 2008. But at the same time, the results
               evidence similarities across the three countries how the crisis and its impact was
               framed to discourses. In all countries, the use of concepts related to crisis and
               insecurity has increased dramatically since 2008. However, this vocabulary is not
               solely limited to the financial crisis. The insecurity and
                  crisis frame referred both to the financial crisis, the armed conflict
               in Ukraine and to the refugee crisis.
         
Full Body Text: 

            1    Introduction
            During the past decade advances in text mining have demonstrated that political
               issues and topics can be identified from unstructured textual documents with good
               accuracy. Examples from digital parliamentary studies or computational discourse
               analysis have brought up evidence how especially topic modelling can be applied on
               large document corpora to gain overviews over thematic structures of political texts,
               but also how these structures change over time. Most of these studies analyse large,
               even huge textual corpora with thousands of lengthy documents. Such big text
               analysis is often seen as typical example of how digital methods can – even should –
               be applied in social sciences and the Humanities.
            In this article I focus on the problem of using digital methods and tools on a
               smaller corpus of unstructured textual documents, namely New Year’s addresses, with
               varying political content and as addressed to a wide public audience, the citizens in
               general. Although politicians often favour longer speeches and verbal battles when it
               comes to struggle for political issues, especially the growing relevance of social
               media driven political communication has strengthened the role of short textual
               documents like tweets, postings, statements or commentaries in political discourse.
               Since most short textual contributions are designed to take stand on current affairs
               and actual political questions, they offer an interesting empirical material to
               explore not only how politicians take stand on current affairs, but also the
               structure and dynamics of issue-driven political discourses.
            This article is based on the understanding that sort political texts can be a
               valuable source when it comes to identifying topics and issues that really matter
               under the current political circumstances. Rising a current topic in a short
               political text can be seen as an act of politicalisation , i.e. an action marking the issue as political by detecting its
               political potential and thus expanding the presence of the political and presenting a
               particular representation of reality
               . This is especially relevant for addresses and
               speeches given by high representatives of a nation like president or prime minister.
               All issues taken up in such texts are automatically labelled as being politically
               significant, so that the speech itself can be read as an attempt to persuade the
               target audience to accept this position .
            The empirical results of this article suggest that New Year’s speeches offer a
               valuable and interesting source for the exploration of topical issues enjoying
               political and societal relevance. The argument here is rooted in the understanding
               that if an issue is taken up in a New Year’s address, the issue is considered as
               important and becomes politicised . Hence, the corpus of
               German, Austrian, and Swiss New Year’s speeches offers an interesting source to
               explore topical discourses from both national and comparative, cross-national
               perspective.
            From the methodological perspective the application of digital text mining and
               analysis tools on a corpus of short texts consisting of several hundred words in
               average requires an adapted approach. This, because most tools for text mining have
               been developed for large-to-huge text corpora with millions of words and use
               statistical methods to model the corpus. Although these methods produce results also
               when applied to small corpora, the results tend to be biased and their reliability
               compromised. In order to circumvent these problems I use a rather novel approach of
               Text Network Analysis (TNA) using a non-linear approach to re-construct textual
               documents as a network of words appearing close to each other in the original
               documents . One of the key advantages of TNA is that
               since TNA is rooted in (Social) Network Analysis the resulting network can be
               visualised and analysed by methods and tools developed for network analysis. Another
               advantage is that networks can be created without any arduous preprocessing, although
               lemmatisation and stopword removal are strongly encouraged. One main objective of
               this article is the introduction of TNA as an alternative, relatively easy to use
               explorative tools for both text mining and topic modelling.
            The analysis and results presented in this article should evidence the power of TNA
               as a topic modelling and exploration tool for short(er) text documents. The analysis
               introduces a non-linear way to analyse texts as networks and to present results based
               on graphical visualisations making it easier to capture and understand structural
               characteristics hidden in the corpus. The results, in turn, provide interesting
               insights in thematic continuity and change in political topics in the analysed three
               German-speaking countries. Further, a detailed discussion of the results confirm the
               accuracy of the main findings of my TNA analysis, thus providing additional support
               for the usefulness of the method.
            The article is structured as follows. The first main section discusses TNA as an
               alternative digital tool for topic modelling. The second section introduces the
               empirical corpus used in this article and describes the data preparation process, as
               well the analytical steps needed for TNA. The corpus consists of New Year’s addresses
               given by political leaders in Germany, Switzerland and Austria between 2000 and 2021.
               All speeches are given in German language. The third section presents and discusses
               the main findings by reflecting them against contextual factors and previous
               research. The article is rounded up with concluding remarks critically summarising
               the main findings and achievements.
         

            2    Text Network Analysis
            Since the first decade of the 21st century digital research tools and methods have
               gained a stronger role and impact among social scientists interested in parliamentary
               debates, political speeches or other textual materials on political affairs. A great
               majority of such kind of contributions has focused on the identification of the main
               content through the analysis of commonly used words, by focusing on the content
               different words as used, or through the analysis of co-occurring words. For a
                  good overview of different methods for content mining, see e.g. 
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
                  
            
            A known challenge with political speeches is that such texts normally tackle several
               topics or issues. However, changes from one topic to another can be be hard to detect
               with methods based on a bag-of-words approach. This, because such an approach
               transforms the document in a word frequency table. Although such a table is rather
               simple to handle and analyse, the other side of the coin is that such a
               transformation destroys the original structure of the text, making it impossible to
               gain understanding about where different words appear in the original text . 
             present evidence for an existence of latent shared
               ideological positions among experts. In this article I expand this underlying
               assumption to include politicians as well, and make the initial assumption that
               politicians tend to what I would call thematic recycling, i.e. the endeavour
               to take up the same – or similar – issues over and over again on different occasions.
               Hence, a corpus of political textual documents from a politician can be assumed to
               share similar topics across different documents. Further, as in the case of expert
               texts we can, with some caution, generalise this assumption and expect to find shared
               topics by politicians sharing same or highly similar political insights rooted in
               certain ideological positions. Accordingly, we can expect to find shared latent
               topics and political positions also in documents delivered by different political
               actors sharing a similar political landscape.
            Thus far most studies dealing with the problem of identifying topics across documents
               in a document collection have applied methods of topic modelling, mostly Latent
               Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) . There are many good reasons for
               this, maybe the most important being its flexibility in defining the document,
               allowing the researcher to condition the topic distribution on paragraphs or time
               chunks, for example. However, as a method based on statistical modelling LDA also has
               some important caveats and pitfalls limiting its analytical power especially as
               regards shorter text documents and smaller corpora. One limitation being highly
               relevant for this article is that most LDA-based applications require datasets of
               several hundred documents, at minimum, to ensure validity and reliability of the
               results . 
            Although identifying different topics is an interesting challenge of explorative text
               analysis, this article tackles a bit different challenge: how to explore thematic
               pathways across documents in a text document corpus. Accordingly, the aim is to
               explore, on the one hand, how words are used within statements, and how thematically
               similar statements glue different texts together across contexts, on the
               other. These thematic pathways building on statements and connecting different
               contexts should help us to understand the deep thematic backbone underlying the
               document corpus . 
            The analysis presented in the next section is an application of Text Network Analysis
               (TNA), a method originally presented by Paranyushkin (2011) and rooted in theoretical
               foundations of Social Network Analysis (SNA). According to Paranyushkin TNA seeks to
               discover repetitive patterns derived from the text’s structure,
                  using their connectivity and the intensity of interactions between them as the
                  only criteria for their belonging together
               . It is a non-linear approach transforming
               texts to a network of words by respecting the original structure of the texts. , who use TNA to identify policy frames of nuclear
               energy policy across different countries, summarise the method by stating that it
               seeks to identify salient words and concepts in order to extract
                  underlying meanings and frames from the structure of concept networks. As
               the contributions of both Paranyushkin and Shim et al. evidence TNA offers a very
               powerful tool with a robust fundament in network analysis and a rather simple and
               straightforward application. Further, text networks can be created as flexibly
               conditioned on e.g. sliding window techniques, sentences, or paragraphs. This gives a
               researcher additional flexibility to test different approaches to figure out the most
               suitable text unit for the analysis.
            This article stems from the assumption that TNA as a non-linear analysis of textual
               data could provide us with new ontological understanding about structural coherence
               and holes within a document corpora. This new ontological understanding, however, is
               not only expected to shed light on how concepts connect in order to form statements.
               Instead, it can also help us to explore structures relevant for the understanding of
               how statements are organised within and across contexts. Through the application of
               network visualisations and the analysing of structural properties of text networks
               the underlying data can be explored from alternative perspectives in order to trace
               back discursive patterns within the text corpus.
            One key difference of TNA compared to more traditional tools and techniques of text
               mining is that TNA understands its input as network data consisting of
                  nodes (or vertices) connected by edges and
               having an own structure (topology) 
               
               . A common technique is to use word-based units – single
               words or n-grams - as nodes and co-occurrences as edges. Although this is the most
               common way, nothing actually prevents the researcher from using e.g. phrases as
               nodes, just to mention another example illustrating the analytical flexibility of
               TNA. Since TNA works based on network theory, it does not require any predefined
               ontological structure or pattern of text, nor does it superimpose any extra layer of
               ontologies on top of the textual data, which may - as  correctly states – create a strong subjective (and
                  even cultural) bias into the structure of the resulting text graphs.
               Further, the researcher is not limited to the use of text theories or text mining
               tools (although nothing prevents her to use this kind of theories or tools in the
               analysis), but can apply a wide range of network analysis tools and methods to
               explore, analyse and visualise structural properties of the text networks. In other
               words, TNA gives the researcher the possibility to explore and analyse textual units
               conditioned to a certain structure and, thus, to explain why different textual units
               take different positions and roles by focusing on the network structure of the
               text.
         

            3    Data and Workflow
            The empirical case study in this article is based on New Year’s speeches of the three
               German-speaking countries, Germany, Austria and Switzerland Switzerland is in
                  fact a multilingual country with four official languages, German included.
               covering the years from 2000 to 2021. These three countries were selected, first,
               based on the shared language providing us the possibility to compare the use of
               language of high politics across these countries. Second, all three countries belong
               to the same cultural-political space, Central Europe, with a strong, continental
               orientation and a centuries-long experience and tradition of German cultural,
               economic, and political influence, but also dominance .
               Besides the two more or less uniting criteria, the third selection criterion was a
               dividing factor: Germany and Austria are members in the European Union (EU), whereas
               Switzerland is only indirectly involved in European integration through its
               membership in the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) and a set of bilateral
               agreements with the EU. Switzerland is also member of the Schengen area allowing any
               person, irrespective of nationality, to cross the internal borders without being
               subjected to border checks. Currently, most of the EU countries plus the non-EU
               countries Iceland, Norway, Switzerland and Liechtenstein have joined the Schengen
               area. Against this background I expect these three countries to form an imagined
                  community (Benedict Anderson) and to share certain values, interests and world
               views reflected by the New Year’s addresses. Further, I expect German and Austrian
               New Year’s speeches to share discursive patterns related to EU affairs, especially to
               the euro crisis (since 2008), the conflict in Ukraine (since 2014), and the refugee
               crisis (since 2015). For a similar design, see  who
                  apply text network analysis on nuclear policy documents from six countries in
                  order to analyse how the Fukushima accident affected nuclear energy policy
                  frames. I also could explore the impact of the global Covid-19 pandemic
               disease on both the content and vocabulary across the three countries yet this impact
               is visible only in the speeches for the year 2021.
            New Year’s speeches held by leading politicians–mostly prime ministers or
               presidents–have a long and firm tradition in Europe and have
                  become an institution instead of being a crowing event for conciliatory
                  efforts
               . From the perspective of political
               communication, New Year’s addresses fulfil a triple function in the intersection of
               the past, the present and the future. First, they summarise the past year from the
               perspective of the political leadership and, hence, recall, reconstruct and remind
               the most important events of the year. Second, New Year’s speeches describe the
               present and, thus, can be understood and analysed as reality constructions, as
               windows to the current state of affairs. And third, New Year’s speeches serve as road
               maps to the future, into the new year. In this sense, a New Year’s speeches
               summarises the most important future challenges, expectations and opportunities.
            There exist only a small number of dedicated studies on New Year’s speeches 
               
               . I could not identify any specific reason for this,
               despite that New Year’s speeches are dominantly given in non-English speaking
               countries in Europe. As a text genre, however, New Year’s addresses are comparable
               with the Presidential Inaugural speeches of the U.S. and this article
               methodologically benefits from the study of  on the United
               States’ Inaugural Addresses. From the perspective of social sciences I am not
               primarily interested in the use of language, but issues mentioned and described in
               the addresses. This viewpoint is rooted in the assumption that a political
               phenomenon, topic or event gains in importance if mentioned in a New Year’s address.
               Here I also follow the idea that New Year’s speeches offer insights into shifts in
               political priorities, interests, and opinions .
               Against this background I am convinced that a longitudinal, computational analysis of
               German, Austrian and Swiss New Year’s addresses can help us to a better understanding
               of how the political landscape has changed between 2000 and 2021, but also where the
               differences and similarities can be found between these three countries.
            The speech corpus covers a period of 22 years and contains 64 speeches. There are two
               missing years – 2002 and 2017 – in the Austrian speech collection. In Austria Federal
               President delivers the New Year’s speeches and between 2000 and 2004 the speeches
               were delivered by Thomas Klestil, between 2005 and 2016 by Heinz Fischer, and since
               2018 by Alexander Van der Bellen. Although speeches from 2005 onwards can be
               downloaded from the official website of
               the Austrian Federal President. Fortunately, the speeches of 2000-2001 and 2003-2004
               could be found in different Austrian media archives. As regards the year 2002,
               neither the President’s office nor the National Archive of Austria could provide any
               information about where this particular New Year’s speech could be found, so that I
               was forced to drop this year from the corpus. In 2017 Austria had an extraordinary
               political situation with no Federal President in office, so that no New Year’s speech
               was given.
            In Germany, the New Year’s speeches are held by Federal Chancellor and full texts are
               available on the official website. It
                  should be noted that in Germany also the Federal President (Bundespräsident) gives a speech on Christmas. This Christmas speech
                  is, what comes to its function as a political speech act, very similar to the New
                  Year’s speech. Since the purpose of this article is to compare New Year’s
                  addresses, German Christmas speeches are not included in this study.. The
               first six speeches (2000-2005) were held by Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, the
               remaining sixteen from 2006 to 2021 by Chancellor Angela Merkel. In Switzerland, the
               annual New Year’s speech is delivered by the President of the Confederation and all
               speeches since 1980 are available online on the official website of the President of the Confederation. As the term of the
               Swiss President is just one year all New Year’s speeches are held by a different
               person (except Micheline Calmy-Rey, Pascal Couchepin and Moritz Leuenberger, all of
               them re-elected and with two speeches).
            Despite the varieties in the use of language in the German-speaking Europe, formal
               speeches by top-level politicians can be seen as an appropriate source of data, as
               policy discourses are comprised of policy addresses and speeches about policy issues
                  . 

            
               Length (# of terms) of New Year’s speeches in Germany, Austria and Switzerland
                  2000-2021.
               
               A picture of three line graphs
            


            New Year’s speeches are traditionally broadcasted over TV or radio within a
               relatively short time of 10 to 15 minutes. Consequently, these speeches are relative
               compact in size. The average speeches length of a German new New Year’s speech was
               892 tokens and standard deviation (sd) was 111. In Austria and Switzerland the
               average lengths were 719 (sd=58) and 562 (sd=159) respectively (Figure 1). Quite
               understandably the amount of unique tokens is somewhat lower, since certain words are
               used several times during a speech. For German New Year’s addresses, there were 362
               unique tokens in average (sd=33), for Austrian and Swiss speeches the average number
               of unique tokens was 317 (sd=27) and 255 (sd=60) respectively. Swiss New Year’s
               speeches seem to have become shorter over time, whereas both German and Austrian New
               Year’s speeches remain relative stable over time (Figure 1). Generally speaking a
               country’s size seem to matter here, as German New Year’s speeches are slightly longer
               than the Austrian or Swiss addresses. My explanation for this observed difference
               stems from the differences in political and economic importance. Germany’s central
               role in European politics results in broader political agenda, so that there are more
               issues and topics to be addressed to in a New Year’s address.
            As regards the analysis workflow, all collected speeches were saved in separate files
               in plain text format. These files were then imported into RStudio, a graphical end-user environment
               for the statistical package R. The
               research data was created and analysed in the four steps. First, I used the package
                  ’udpipe’ The package is available and documented at:https://bnosac.github.io/udpipe/docs/doc2.html. For a technical and
                  scientific description of the package, see Straková 2017. to tokenise,
               part-of-speech tag, and lemmatise the documents. After this step, the data was
               structured as a data table consisting of 53893 words and 5277 unique lemmata,
               enriched with descriptive metadata about the country and the year, as well sentence
               indices. In the third step, I used text mining and explorative data analysis tools
               from the package ’tidytext’ to carry out different text analyses and to transform textual
               data to different sets of text network data. The applied text mining methods will be
               described in the next section. For the text network network creation I used both
               bi-grams by linking two consecutive words, as well skipgrams of length two by
               combining non-adjacent words that were three, four or five words apart. This
                  technique was adopted from Jelveh et al. (2014). Both the bi-grams and
               skipgrams were created within the boundaries of the same sentence based on the
               sentence index included in the data structure. (2) in the case of concepts used in a
               single country, only concepts which occur more than three times are included. Text
               networks were visualised and analysed with ’visone’, a fully-fledged, platform
               independent software offering powerful layouts for network visualisations and a
               comprehensive set of tools for network manipulation, transformation and analysis. 
         

            4    Results


            
               New Year’s speeches similarity network (2000-2021).
               
               image of a network
            

            Figure 2 presents the addresses network for the whole corpus based on the similarity
               of the New Year’s addresses. Similarity is here calculated as cosine measure, a
               term-based comparison between documents in a document corpus, and has a value range
               from 0 (no similarity at all) to 1 (full similarity). For details, see  I reduced noise in the document-term matrix
               by removing both stopwords and all terms except nouns, verbs, pronouns, and proper
               nouns. In the network visualisation nodes represent different New Years speeches and
               are coloured with country-specific colours so that German addresses are coloured with
               yellow, Austrian with red, and Swiss speeches with white. I have also added labels to
               help the reader to identify different addresses. Nodes are connected by edges, of
               which width is visualised proportional to the cosine measure of the two speeches
               connected by that edge. In my data the cosine measures ranged from 0.103 (between the
               Swiss speeches 2006 and 2020) to 0.641 (between the German speeches 2009 and 2010),
               but I have removed edges with cosine measure below 0.400 in order to improve the
               readability of the network visualisation. Further, I used a force-directed layout and
               optimised it to position speeches with higher similarity closer, those with lesser to
               each other so that the clusters of more similar speeches are easier to identify.
            As regards the similarity network two observations seem appropriate. First, the New
               Year’s speeches evidence a stronger similarity within, and weaker similarity across
               countries. This is clearly visible in the network structure as well, as speeches from
               different countries form clear and distinct cluster in the visualisation (see Figure
               2). Overall, the average similarity for cross-country speeches is 0.318 (min=0.114,
               max=0.514), for national speeches the average similarity is 0.384 (min=0.103,
               max=0.614). If we set the threshold value for cosine measure to 0.5, only two
               cross-national combinations, namely Austria 2018 – Switzerland 2020 (0.505) and
               Germany 2014 – Switzerland 2018 (0.514), exceed this limit. Varieties of national
               political agenda and circumstances seem to explain these observed differences, thus
               underlining the primacy of national topical issues. An interesting result is also
               that the cosine similarity between German and Austrian speeches is significantly
               higher (mean=0.355) than that between German/Austrian and Swiss speeches
               (mean=0.277). This difference is at least partly explained by the EU membership, as
               certain topical issues both German and Austrian speeches tackle are connected to EU
               politics.
            And second, similarity seems to be stronger between between chronologically close
               speeches and weaker between speeches with greater temporal distance. I tested this
               with a simple Pearson’s correlation test and calculated the correlation between the
               cosine measure and the temporal distance in years between the New Year’s addresses.
               The correlation was -0.085 (p<0.001), thus confirming the hypothesis that the
               similarity measure decreases when the temporal distance between compared speeches
               increases. This seems logical when reflected against the fact that New Year’s
               speeches tackle topical issues at the end of a year. The longer the temporal distance
               between two addresses, the more probable there has been significant changes in
               political circumstances affecting the vocabulary used in the addresses. Hence, this
               observation also gives support to the argument that New Year’s speeches offer an
               interesting and valuable perspective on a year’s prevailing political reality.

            
               The 20 most important words per country in different periods (tf-idf
                  analysis).
               
               image of a set of bar graphs
            


            Results from the document-level TNA suggested the existence of variance in vocabulary
               between the countries and over time. In order to better understand this variance I
               applied a specific text mining method, called term frequency, inverse document
               frequency (tf-idf) analysis, to adjust the frequency of a word for how
               rarely it is used in the collection of New Year’s speeches of each country. A word’s
               inverse document frequency (idf) was then applied to explore words that
               are not used very much during the whole period from 2000 to 2021. I divided each
               national collection of New Year’s speeches into three distinct periods of 2000-2009,
               2010-2019, and 2020-2021. Here the idea was to capture changes in the vocabulary over
               time within a country, most probably caused by changes in topical issues or political
               circumstances. The results of this tf-idf analysis are presented in
               Figure 3. In this barplot we can see for each country the most important words in
               each distinct period of time. Hence, the Figure 3 highlights temporal changes within
               each country, but preserves national differences. In my opinion three central
               findings from this analysis are worth being discussed in detail.
            First, the connection to topical political issues and circumstances is especially
               evident in Germany across the time periods, but also clearly visible in Austrian
               speeches of the last two periods. As regards Germany, during the first period
               (2000-2009) words like wiederaufbau (rebuilding), betroffen (upset),
               and mitgefühl (sympathy, compassion), together with such words like
                  naturkatastrophe (natural disaster), region (region), or
                  erschüttern (shock, shake) belonging to the top-30 tf-idf
               words in this period, tackle the 2002 European flood. Germany was the hardest hit
               country in Europe and the flood resulted in heated political discussions in the eve
               of the Federal elections 2002. In Austrian speeches of this period words like
                  jahrhudert (century), katastrophe (catastrophe), and
                  hilfsbereitschaft (helpfulness) document the presence of the 2002 flood –
               which hit also Austria quite severely – also in Austrian political discourses.
            Another issue in this period was the outbreak of the sovereign debt crisis in the
               eurozone in 2008/2009. This economic crisis is present in German speeches through
               words like globalisierung (globalisation), wirtschaft (economy),
                  arbeitslosigkeit, (unemployment). Contrary to Germany, the eurozone crisis
               is not very present and visible in Austrian speeches in this period of time. A
               possible explanation to this difference might be found in the different roles the two
               countries played in the early stage of the eurozone crisis. Germany as the strongest
               economy in the eurozone played a central, designing role from the very beginning of
               the eurozone crisis 
               
               
               , whereas Austria were not strongly hit by, nor a central
               player in this crisis. In addition to that I would also stress the economy-oriented
               political culture in Germany. The strong role of economic questions as a central
               shaping factor of German domestic and European politics increases the weight of
               topical economic issues in public debates. Against this background it is not
               surprisingly that the eurozone crisis occupied a more significant space in public
               debates in German compared to Austria 
               . 
            During the second period (2010-2019) the focus of German New Year’s speeches shifts
               from economy to refugee politics. In 2015 Chancellor Merkel decided to keep German
               state borders open to refugees coming mainly from the Middle East. Although this
               political turn was captured in positive political slogans like
                  Willkommenskultur (culture of welcoming) or – most prominently – Wir
                  schaffen das (we can do it/ we manage it), the fact that words like
                  flüchtling (refugee), zusammenhalt (sticking together),
                  herausforderung (challenge), außengrenze (outer border), or
                  aufnehmen (receive, welcome) are among the top-20 terms underline the
               change the refugee crisis caused in German public and political discourses during
               this period of 2010-2019. From the methodological point of view the identification of
               terms with a clear connection to the refugee crisis evidence the usefulness of
                  tf-idf analysis when it comes to explore discursive changes. Contrary
               to Germany, the refugee crisis was not central in Austrian New Year’s addresses.
               Instead, the national political and economic setting seem to dominate Austrian
               addresses. Terms like marktwirtschaft (market economy), lebensqualität
               (quality of life), or finanz(finance) tackle economic consequences of the
               eurozone crisis. The word politikverdrossenheit (jadedness with politics)
               refers to domestic political turbulences behind the rise of the right-wing populist
               Freedom Party of Austria (FPÖ) in the mid-2010s. Although this rise was partly
               supported by the refugee crisis, it was also an expression of disillusionment with
               the political elite.
            Second, as expected the outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic disease in Europe in the
               first half of 2020 resulted in a clear change, especially as regards the German and
               Austrian New Year’s addresses. Words like pandemie (pandemic),
                  impfung/impfstoff (vaccination), abstand (distance), or
                  corona (coronavirus) poke from the results as indicators for this
               discursive change in political and public discourse in Germany and Austria. Once
               again, the results also confirm the usefulness of tf-idf analysis for
               the exploration of discursive changes through changes in vocabulary over time.
            And third, the overall results confirm the hypothesis that Germany and Austria are,
               what comes to political agenda and circumstances, as well to topical issues, closer
               to each other than to Switzerland. It is, however, a somewhat odd observation that
               Swiss speeches seem to avoid topical political issues and to concentrate
               on the construction of neutral narratives. A possible explanation for this might be
               found in the fact that in Switzerland, as opposed to Germany and Austria, the federal
               president giving the New Year’s speech is not the head of state, but just the head of
               Switzerland’s Federal Council, and only carries out some representative duties.
               Hence, the federal president is merely a mediator between the different parts of the
               Swiss federal state.
            The results presented thus far indicate two main aspects. First, New Year’s addresses
               offer a valuable and reliable source to explore topical issues and tackle changes in
               political and public discourses. And second, although the national political agenda
               and circumstances seem to have a stronger impact on the content of the addresses,
               significant European political incidents and events, e.g. the refugee crisis or the
               Covid-19 pandemic disease, seem to cause changes across countries. This leads us to
               the final analysis, an attempt to explore shared topics. For this analysis I
               constructed text networks based on bigrams, i.e. word co-occurrences of two adjacent
               words, and of skipgrams, i.e. combinations of two non-adjancent words that are three
               to five words apart . The bi- and skipgrams
               were created for words occurring within the same paragraph. Since the idea is to
               analyse topics across countries all word pairs co-occurring in New Year’s speeches of
               one single country only were removed. In the last step I calculated a co-occurrence
               weight measure by dividing the number of speeches a word pair co-occurs by the total
               number of speeches (64) in the multi-national corpus. The interpretation of this
               weight measure is rather straightforward: the higher the value, the more significant
               the word pair for the cross-country content.

            
               New Year’s speeches core bigram network across the three countries
                  (2000-2021).
               
               network diagram
            

            
               New Year’s speeches core skipgram network across the three countries
                  (2000-2021).
               
               network diagram
            

            Figure 4 visualises word co-occurrences network across countries based on bigrams,
               whereas Figure5 visualises word co-occurrence network across countries based on
               skipgrams. Hence, both visualised text networks present shared word co-occurrences
               central for the multi-country corpus of German, Austrian, and Swiss New Year’s
               addresses, i.e. word pairs that can be interpreted as fundamental for the – put in
               Benedict Anderson’s (1991) famous terminology – imagined discursive community of
               these three German-speaking countries. The bigram-based core text network consists of
               336 words and 565 co-occurrences, whereas the skipgram-based core text network
               consists of 423 words and 1157 co-occurrences.
            In order to visually highlight the most important structural properties both
               visualisations apply identical visualisation effects: 
            
               Node size is mapped to the node’s degree centrality value and node label size
                  is mapped the nodes betweenness centrality measure. In network theory centrality,
                  in general, indicates a node’s position in the network and can be calculated
                  either relative to a node’s direct neighbours or the whole network. A node’s
                  degree is the simplest centrality measure and equals to the number of connections
                  the node has to other nodes. Betweenness, as the term itself indicates, defines
                  centrality by analysing where a node is placed within the network. Consequently, a
                  node’s betweenness centrality score is computed by taking into consideration the
                  rest of the network and by looking at how many times a node sits on the shortest
                  path linking two other nodes together, thus helping to identify nodes having
                     a high probability of occurring on a randomly chosen
                     shortest path between two randomly chosen vertices
                  
                  . Considering meaning circulation across
                  the entire network, the latter capability is assumed to be more relevant, since
                  betweenness centrality shows the variety of contexts where
                     the word appears, while high degree shows the variety of words next to which
                     the word appears
                  . This difference is important to keep
                  in mind and therefore I use betweenness centrality to measure a concept’s general
                  status in the text network. As both  and  point out concepts with high betweenness and degree
                  centrality play a meaning circulation role across texts in the document corpus,
                  whereas concepts with low centrality measures are peripheral concepts and, thus,
                  typical only for a certain part of documents. Between these two extremes are
                  located concepts with high betweenness but low degree centrality and concepts with
                  low betweenness but high degree centrality. The former play an important role as
                  bridging concepts between local communities, the latter, in turn, are local hubs
                  within a cluster . This mapping strategy allows
                  us to easily identify the most important and influential words in the
                  graph.
               Node colour is mapped to the topic cluster the node belongs to. One of the
                  proposed key advantages of TNA is bound with the possibility to exploit network
                  community detection techniques. For a summary, see 
                      The underlying idea here is that when textual
                  documents are reconstructed as text networks a word’s position in the network is
                  not random but determined relative to the context it appears in. Consequently,
                  words belonging to the same (or similar) context are assumed to cluster across
                  documents, so that we could be able to identify groups of words in the network
                  structure having dense connections within the group, but sparse
                  connections to other parts of the text next. These groups are here interpreted as
                  topics describing the main thematic content of the document corpus. By leaning on
                  the promising results of  and  I applied a modularity-based community detection method
                  called Louvain method based on the assumption, that nodes
                  being more densely connected together than with the rest of the network construct
                  a network community . The method identified in total
                  13 clusters - in my interpretation: topics - in the bigram-based and 12 topics in
                  the skipgram-based text network.
               Edge width is mapped to the weight of the co-occurrence of the word pair. The
                  more often two words co-occur in the document corpus, the wider the connecting
                  edge is visualised in the network graph. Since the graph includes only word pairs
                  shared by at least two countries, edge effects help us to identify word pairs used
                  together frequently across countries. 
               Layout used for the visualisation is a radar-like centrality layout, in which a
                  node’s position is determined by its topic cluster and links are arranged
                  according to their weights. The underlying idea of this layout is to gather nodes
                  belonging to the same cluster on the same circumference. Further, the
                  visualisation makes also connections between the clusters – i.e. word pairs, of
                  which words belong to different topic clusters – easier to identify. As regards
                  the meaning circulation across the multi-country text network word pairs
                  connecting two topics can be analysed from the perspective of structural holes.
                  These connections bridging two separate topics by closing a structural hole in a
                  network can make us aware of possibly existing latent similarities between these
                  two topics . 
            

            
               Most important topics in the New Year’s speeches across countries.
               
                   Bigram text network core communities
                  (Total # of clusters: 13, modularity: 0.55) 
               
               
                  
                     Cluster
                  
                  
                     Core content words of the topic(a)
               
               
                  
                     #1: Solidarity / Sense of community (55 words in total)
                  bürgerin/bürger, frieden, geschichte, hilfbereitschaft, sicherheit,
                     stabilität, verantwortung, wiederaufbau, zukunft, zusammenhalt
               
               
                  
                     #2: Crisis recovery (41)
                  einsetzen, ereignis, erinnern, freuen, generation, glauben, krise,
                     verbinden, weltkrieg, überwinden
               
               
                  
                     #3: Covid-19 era (36)
                  erfolgreich, familie, friedlich, meistern, pandemie, phase, resignation,
                     schwierig, zeit, zusammenleben
               
               
                  
                     #4: Europe (32)
                  entwicklung, erweiterung, europäisch, hoffnung, krieg, mitgliedstaat,
                     parlament, terror, union, wählen
               
               
                   Skipgram text network core communities 
                  (Total # of clusters: 12, modularity: 0.35) 
               
               
                  
                     Cluster
                  
                  
                     Core content words of the topic(a)
               
               
                  
                     #1: Crisis recovery (62 words in total)
                  erinnerung, friedlich, krieg, mauer, notwendig, optimismus, pandemie,
                     vergessen, verlust, wirtschaftskrise
               
               
                  
                     #2: Faith in the future (51)
                  aufschwung, bemühen, gestaltung, neugier, selbstvertrauen, technik,
                     wirklichkeit, wissenschaft, zufriedenheit, zuversicht
               
               
                  
                     #3: Economy (46)
                  arbeitsplatz, beitrag, einsatz, erreichen, global, idee, leisten, offen,
                     unternehmen, wirtschaft
               
               
                  
                     #4: Solidarity / Sense of community (45)
                  alltag, bürgerin/bürger, demokratie, entwicklung, familie, frieden,
                     gemeinsam, gemeinschaft, stehen, welt
               
            
            (a) Core content words include ten (10) most influental words relative to the topic
               of the cluster (listed in alphabetical order). Bold words indicate top ranking words
               both in degree and betweenness centrality, i.e. words being central for meaning
               circulation across the text network.
            Table 1 summarises the most significant results of the community detection analysis
               of both the bigram based and the skipgram based text network by focusing on the four
               largest communities found by the Louvain algorithm. As expected there is some
               variance across topics between the bigram and skipgram networks. I consider this
               variation as normal when the differences in network data creation is taken into
               account. Actually, against this background, the two networks should not be considered
               as exclusionary but complementary to each other. I have given each community a
               descriptive label based on a manual evaluation of the vocabulary linked to the
               community.
            There are two shared topics. I have labelled the first Solidarity / Sense of
                  community and it is the largest topic in the bigram and fourth largest topic
               in the skipgram text network. Both includes words bürger/bürgerin (citizen)
               and frieden (peace). In the bigram network this topic is with respect to
               content more focused on helpfulness and security, indicated through words like
                  hilfebereitschaft (helpfulness), sicherheit (security),
                  stabilität (stability), verantwortung (responsibility), and
                  zusammenhalt (togetherness, solidarity). The skipgram network, in turn, has
               in this topic a stronger bias towards democracy and society embodied by words like
                  alltag (everyday life), demokratie (democracy), familie
               (family), and gemeinschaft (community).
            This topic appears in different contexts over time. In the German New Year’s speech
               in 2006 the topic is used to emphasise the inter-linkages between Germany and the
               international, global community: 
            References to speeches can be located at the following: Austrian New Years
               speeches 2000-2021. Available at the website of the Federal President of
                  Austria, German New Years speeches 2000-2021. Available at the website of
               the German Chancellor's Office, Swiss New Years speeches 2000-2021. Available
               at the website of the Swiss Federal Council
            Deutschland ist keine Insel. Wir stehen
                     in einem internationalen Qualitätswettbewerb, der alle Bereiche unseres
                     Zusammenlebens betrifft: Welcher Nation gelingt es am besten, die
                     schöpferischen Kräfte ihrer Menschen zu wecken? Wie offen ist eine Gesellschaft
                     für Neues? Was bietet sie jungen Familien? In welchem Land gibt es die besten
                     Schulen und Hochschulen? Wie gut gelingt das Miteinander von Einheimischen und
                     Zuwanderern?
               
               Germany 2006
            In the German speech of 2015, the topic is used in the context of the refugee crisis
               to foster solidarity among citizens, but also to strengthen confidence and commitment
               to the community and its values:
            Genauso klar ist: Nur mit offenen
                     Diskussionen und Debatten können wir Lösungen finden, die langfristig Bestand
                     haben und von Mehrheiten getragen werden. Wir sind es, die Bürger und ihre
                     gewählten Repräsentanten, die entwickeln und verteidigen werden, was dieses
                     unser liberales und demokratisches Land so lebenswert und liebenswert macht.
                     Wir sind es, die Lösungen finden werden, die unseren ethischen Normen
                     entsprechen, und den sozialen Zusammenhalt nicht gefährden. Lösungen, die das
                     Wohlergehen der eigenen Bürger berücksichtigen, aber nicht die Not der
                     Flüchtlinge vergessen.
               
               Germany 2015
            The Austrian speech of 2007, in turn, highlights the role of persons in different
               positions of trust for the security, stability and confidence of the community: 
            Lassen Sie mich abschließend die
                     Gelegenheit benutzen, um den vielen Frauen und Männern herzlich zu danken, die
                     in den verschiedensten Funktionen für unser Gemeinwohl, für unsere Sicherheit,
                     für unsere Gesundheit und für den Zusammenhalt unserer Gesellschaft
                     buchstäblich oft Tag und Nacht beruflich, oder auch als freiwillige Helferinnen
                     und Helfer tätig sind. Der Wert dessen, was hier geleistet wird, kann gar nicht
                     hoch genug eingeschätzt werden.
               Austria 2007
            And finally, the following two quotes from the Swiss speeches of 2017 and 2021
               establish connections between the economic welfare, sovereignty and stability of the
               country and the solidarity and togetherness of the society: 
            Stabil und erfolgreich wollen wir auch
                     in Zukunft sein. Dazu braucht es mehr denn je den Zusammenhalt. Unsere
                     Gesellschaft ist stark, weil wir erprobt sind im Versöhnen von
                     Ansprüchen.
               Switzerland 2017
            Wir Schweizerinnen und Schweizer müssen
                     zusammenstehen. Nur so können wir als Land einstehen für die Interessen von uns
                     allen: für unsere Gesundheit und unser wirtschaftliches Wohlergehen, für
                     Frieden und Verbundenheit, für Freiheit und Unabhängigkeit, – kurz: für alles,
                     was uns seit Langem lieb und teuer ist.
               
               Switzerland 2021
            The second shared topic is labelled Crisis recovery. The content vocabulary of
               this topics indicates that this topic is not limited to the Covid-19 pandemic disease
               only. Instead, this topic seems to be used over time to embed a current, topical
               crisis into a wider, historical context. Although the clustering algorithm allocates
               topical words like pandemie (pandemic) or wirtschaftskrise (financial
               crisis) to this cluster, in my interpretation other content words like
                  generation (generation), krieg / weltkrieg (war / world war),
                  überwinden (overcome), optimismus (optimism), mauer (wall),
               and erinnern (remember) stand for this wider historical context.
            Both in the Swiss speech in 2010 and German speech in 2011 this topic was used to
               frame the eurozone crisis. Both quotations manifest a clear optimism that the crisis
               has been successfully fought and the country will recover rather quickly: 
            Wir verfügen über eine starke Wirtschaft
                     und eine solide Finanzpolitik. Wir haben es geschafft, trotz grosser
                     Wirtschaftskrise die Schulden nicht übermässig wachsen zu lassen. Das wird uns
                     im Aufschwung stärken. 
               Switzerland 2010
            Deutschland hat die Krise wie kaum ein
                     anderes Land gemeistert. Was wir uns vorgenommen hatten, das haben wir auch
                     geschafft: Wir sind sogar gestärkt aus der Krise herausgekommen. Und das ist
                     vor allem Ihr Verdienst, liebe Mitbürgerinnen und Mitbürger. 
               Germany 2011
            
            In 2020, the Austrian speech used this topic in a totally different context combining
               the most important crises and challenges of the current time, i.e. climate change,
               digitalisation, and migration, as well questions related to gender equality and
               welfare state reforms.
            Zur Klimakrise kommen weitere große
                     Herausforderungen: Wie werden wir künftig arbeiten? Welche Antworten geben wir
                     in Österreich auf die Digitalisierung? Wie soll sich unser Wirtschaftsstandort
                     entwickeln? Wie gehen wir mit Migration um? Und was tun wir, um Frauenrechte zu
                     stärken? Haben wir ausreichend drüber nachgedacht, das Nötige im
                     Bildungsbereich anzugehen? Welche Reformen sind im Gesundheits- und
                     Sozialsystem notwendig, um soziale Sicherheit und sozialen Zusammenhalt für die
                     Zukunft zu gewährleisten?
               
               Austria 2020
            
            Both text networks produce also distinct topics. In the bigram network we can
               identify the unique topics labelled by myself Covid-19 era and Europe,
               in the skipgram network such topics include Faith in the future and
                  Economy. As regards the bigram-specific topics, Covid-19 era not
               only embodies the strenuousness of the pandemic disease by content words like
                  pandemie (pandemic), resignation (resignation), or the word
               combination schwierig + zeit (hard times), but also seeks to create
               hope through words like erfolgreich (successful), familie (family),
                  meistern (control), zusammenleben (life together). The topic
                  Europe, in turn, tackles both current European issues like terrorism
                  (terror), European parliamentary elections (wählen (vote),
                  parlament (parliament)) and European integration as a wider context
                  (europäisch + union (EU), erweiterung (enlargement),
                  mitgliedstaat (member state)). This latter topic clearly evidences the role
               and status of the EU as the most important political, economic, and geographical
               context.
            The topic Covid-19 era is a mixture of resignation and hope. The Austrian
               speech in 2021 well exemplifies this mixture:
            Ein neues Jahr liegt vor uns. Wir spüren
                     noch die Last des alten, die Last der Pandemie. Aber viele von uns spüren trotz
                     allem eine hoffnungsfrohe Erwartung, wie sie nur am Beginn von etwas Neuem
                     stehen kann, wenn alle Möglichkeiten offen und alle Träume noch frisch
                     sind.
               
               Austria 2021
            
            The German address, in turn, acknowledges the dramatic changes caused by the Covid-19
               pandemic disease. At the same, however, the quotation has a positive trait, stressing
               the supportive and stabilising role of the federal state in the times of crisis: 
            Die Aufgaben, vor die die Pandemie uns
                     stellt, bleiben gewaltig. Bei vielen Gewerbetreibenden, Arbeitnehmern,
                     Solo-Selbstständigen und Künstlern herrschen Unsicherheit, ja Existenzangst.
                     Die Bundesregierung hat sie in dieser ganz unverschuldeten Notlage nicht allein
                     gelassen. Staatliche Unterstützung in nie dagewesener Höhe hilft. Verbesserte
                     Kurzarbeitsregeln greifen. Arbeitsplätze können so bewahrt
                  werden.
               Germany 2021
            Contrary to Austria and Germany, the Swiss speech of 2021 is marked by negative
               ambience, even resignation underlining the deep societal impact the Covid-19 pandemic
               disease has caused in Switzerland: 
            Selten haben wir Vergleichbares erlebt:
                     Unsere Tätigkeiten kamen zum Stillstand. Die ganze Gesellschaft befand sich in
                     noch nie dagewesener Isolation. Wir mussten lernen, ohne Händeschütteln
                     auszukommen. Dieses wichtige Begrüssungsritual gefährdete plötzlich unsere
                     Gesundheit.
               Switzerland 2021
            The topic Europe is mostly used, as the following quotations exemplify, to
               remind the citizens about the fundamental importance of European integration as a
               uniting community of Europeans, but also as provider for economic and political
               security in a global world:
            Es geht nun darum, dass die Union nicht
                     nur wirtschaftlich, sondern auch verstärkt politisch und emotional
                     zusammenwächst. Die Bürger müssen spüren, dass es sich lohnt, in diesem
                     erweiterten Europa zu leben und zu arbeiten.
               
               Austria 2003
            In den vergangenen Jahren habe ich oft
                     gesagt, dass es auch Deutschland auf Dauer nur dann gut geht, wenn es auch
                     Europa gut geht. Denn nur in der Gemeinschaft der Europäischen Union können wir
                     unsere Werte und Interessen behaupten und Frieden, Freiheit und Wohlstand
                     sichern.
               Germany 2020
            Wirtschaftlich sind wir weltweit
                     verflochten. Geografisch, historisch und kulturell sind wir ein europäisches
                     Land. Die Beziehungen zu unseren Nachbarländern und zu den anderen
                     Mitgliedstaaten der Europäischen Union regeln wir in bewährter Weise bilateral.
                  
               Switzerland 2005
            Within the skipgram network, the topic Faith in the future represents a strong
               faith in technological and scientific development as the most important fundament for
               a better future. This is especially evident when we consider such content words like
                  technik (technology), wissenschaft (science), aufschwung
               (boom, economic expansion), selbstvertrauen (self-confidence), and
                  zuversicht (confidence). Interestingly, this topic also contains words with
               strong, dynamic connotation to the shaping the future (gestaltung) and the
               putting oneself out (bemühen). How this topic is used to generate optimism
               towards the future is well illustrated by the following quotations: 
            Wie wichtig es ist, auch im scheinbar
                     größten Durcheinander Gelassenheit, Mut und Zuversicht zu bewahren. 
               
               Austria 2020
            Zusammenhalt, Offenheit, unsere
                     Demokratie und eine starke Wirtschaft, die dem Wohl aller dient: Das ist es,
                     was mich für unsere Zukunft hier in Deutschland auch am Ende eines schweren
                     Jahres zuversichtlich sein lässt.
               Germany 2017
            Dennoch bin ich zuversichtlich. Denn ich
                     glaube an die Fähigkeit des Menschen zu gestalten. Es gibt immer einen Weg.
                     Manchmal braucht es Mut und Kraft. 
               
               Switzerland 2010
            Finally, the topic Economy is characterised by very concrete, economic content
               words like arbeitsplatz (job, post), global (global[isation]),
                  unternehmen (company), and wirtschaft (economy). But this topic also
               has a forward-looking content embodied by words like erreichen (reach),
                  idee (idea), or leisten (perform). An excellent example of how this
               topic is present in the speeches is the following quotation from the German speech of
               2008: Deutschland kann seine alte Kraft als das Land der Sozialen Marktwirtschaft
                  wieder neu unter Beweis stellen, der Verbindung von Freiheit und Gerechtigkeit,
                  Fleiß und Unternehmergeist. The same spirit can be found in the following
               Austrian and Swiss addresses: 
            Unsere Bevölkerung hat nicht nur ein
                     Recht auf sichere Grenzen und innere Sicherheit, sie hat auch ein Recht auf ein
                     möglichst hohes Maß an wirtschaftlicher Stabilität und sozialer
                     Sicherheit.
               
               Austria 2013
            Starke Unternehmen sind der beste Garant
                     für Arbeitsplätze. Und Arbeitsplätze sind die Basis für soziale Sicherheit und
                     Wohlstand. Noch gehört die Schweiz zu den wirtschaftlich erfolgreichsten
                     Ländern. Sorgen wir mit freiheitlichen Rahmenbedingungen dafür, dass das so
                     bleibt.
               
               Switzerland 2016
            Overall, the topics identified by the Louvain method seem appropriate and reliable in
               the context of these three countries. The main topics discussed above not only
               connect well to the political and economic reality in these countries or in Europe in
               more general terms, but also evidence that TNA tools offer – as the previous studies
               of , , or  already suggest – a reliable alternative to traditional
               methods of text mining. Further, the differences between topics identified in the
               bigram and the skipgram based network seem to give support to the study of  that the complementary use of both methods can help us to
               reliably identify topics that use similar vocabulary but show differences in the text
               structure. And finally, it is worth being noted that the most important content words
               of each topic contain only a few words with both a high degree centrality and a high
               betweenness centrality. This means that the most important content words are those
               enjoying higher relevance within the topic and, thus, are descriptive for the topic.
               A closer look at words used for meaning circulation across topics and countries
               reveals that these words include words related to peace (frieden,
                  friedlich) and war (krieg), security (sicherheit), crisis
                  (krise), community (gemeinschaft), economy (wirtschaft), and
               future (zukunft). All these glueing words are less topical and more
               contextual, thus framing and embedding the topical issues into a wider context of
               European (integration) history.
         

            5    Discussion
            This article has sought to exemplify the utility of text network analysis as a
               computational method for exploratory text and content analysis. Further, in the
               leaning on similar previous studies, this article also understands TNA as an
               promising and powerful alternative to traditional methods of topic modelling,
               especially to LDA. Against the background of these objectives and based on the
               results of the empirical analysis the following three conclusions are worth being
               discussed.
            First, one major objective of this article was to present and evidence the usefulness
               of computational, exploratory text analysis for gaining new insights of the structure
               and dynamics of a collection of short textual documents. In this respect, the results
               are promising. Especially I would like to highlight the possibilities of using
               network clustering methods for the exploration of topics hidden in the corpus. As the
               result indicate, network clustering algorithms can identify contextually meaningful
               and relevant clusters. As I have shown the applied approach can help the researcher
               to identify appropriate text passages for different topics, serving as a starting
               point for an in-depth context analysis.
            Second, results from the empirical analysis evidence the analytical power of the two
               computational methods applied. On the one hand, the rather traditional
                  tf-idf method helped to gain insights and a better understanding of
               changes over time and of differences between the three countries. By increasing the
               weight of words that are more common in a certain period I could tackle changes in
               the content of the speeches over time. On the other hand, TNA proved to be a rather
               simple, yet powerful alternative to traditional topic modelling methods. The
               validation of the results of the community detection against samples from the
               original sources showed that the identified clusters not only had a meaningful
               content relevant for all countries, but they also were, according to their modularity
               values, valid and reliable. The two methods, when applied in a complementary manner,
               were very useful in identifying changes in the content over time and across nations,
               but also in exploring topics binding these three countries together. Here we could
               also identify one clear difference between the three countries. For Germany and
               Austria Europe seem to play an important role and many speeches reflected the
               fundamental importance of Europe, especially the European Union, as the
               political, economic, and historical context for both countries. Swiss New Year’s
               speeches remain somewhat abstract and globally oriented in this respect, thus
               reflecting the long tradition of the neutral Swiss foreign policy 
               
            
            Third, although the results are encouraging both in empirical and methodological
               sense, the limitations of text network analysis need to be addressed. As Diesner
               et al. (2012) points out, validation of the results can be difficult for densely
               connected large-scale networks. Further, techniques for text preprocessing, node
               identification, and link construction must be decided before mining network structure
               from text data, since these decisions could strongly influence
                  the structure of resulting networks
               . As a comparison of the bigram and skipgram
               networks evidenced, different methods of network data creation may produce different
               results, so that data preprocessing and network analysis techniques should be
               selected with care and be closely aligned with research questions and objectives.
            Overall, the analysis presented in this article is well in line with these previous
               works and supportive for the idea that text network analysis could offer an
               interesting alternative method for computational content analysis. Since the method
               seems to work quite reliable also with smaller data sets I can only encourage
               colleagues interested in this kind of analysis to test TNA tools.
         
