Title:  The Politics of Tools
Volume:  017
Issue:  2
Date:  7 July 2023
Abstract:  
                A consideration of the political meaning of software that tries to add greater
                    philosophical precision to statements about the politics of tools and tool
                    building in the humanities. Using Michael Oakeshott's formulations of the politics of faith and the politics of skepticism, it suggests
                    that while declaring our tools be morally or political neutral may be obvious
                    fallacious, it is equally problematic to suppose that we can predict in advance
                    the political formations that will arise from our tool building. For indeed (as
                    Oakeshott suggests), the tools themselves give rise to what is politically
                    possible.
            
Full Body Text: 

                
                    Zilu said, If the ruler of Wei were to entrust you
                            with governance of his state, what would be your first priority?
                        The Master said, Most certainly, it would be to rectify
                        names.
                    Confucius, Analects
                
            
To speak of the politics of tools is to take the political nature of
                technology for granted, and rightfully so. If the generation of historians, literary
                critics, sociolinguistis, and philosophers who came up in the academy after Foucault
                are united by anything, it is the idea that most things are wrapped up in issues of
                power, and therefore cannot be said to stand outside the realm of the political in
                any way. Such is the case, therefore, with any sort of technology at all — from
                pencils to weapons systems — and it is the business of humanistic inquiry to make
                plain the precise ways in which, as Foucault himself put it, power comes from everywhere
                
And yet digital humanities has often been accused of violating this central
                directive. Alan Liu offered this sobering assessment in 2012.

                
                    While digital humanists develop tools, data, and metadata critically [...]
                        rarely do they extend their critique to the full register of society,
                        economics, politics, or culture. How the digital humanities advances,
                        channels, or resists today's great postindustrial, neoliberal, corporate,
                        and global flows of information-cum-capital is thus a question rarely heard
                        in the digital humanities associations, conferences, journals, and projects
                        with which I am familiar. Not even the clichéd forms of such issues — for
                        example, the digital divide,
                        surveillance,
                        privacy,
                        copyright, and so on — get much play.
                    It is as if, when the order comes down from the funding agencies, university
                        administrations, and other bodies mediating today's dominant socioeconomic
                        and political beliefs, digital humanists just concentrate on pushing the
                            execute button on projects that amass the most data for the
                        greatest number, process that data most efficiently and flexibly (flexible
                        efficiency being the hallmark of postindustrialism), and manage the whole
                        through ever smarter standards, protocols, schema, templates, and
                        databases uplifting Frederick Winslow Taylor's original scientific
                        industrialism into ultraflexible postindustrial content management systems
                        camouflaged as digital editions, libraries, and archives — all without
                        pausing to reflect on the relation of the whole digital juggernaut to the
                        new world order.
                
            
Called now to be woke — in a metaphor that hearkens back to one of humanism’s
                more confident eras — digital humanities now struggles to articulate precisely how
                its work is properly political, and whether its commitment to tools is for
                good or ill.
Liu’s essay was hardly the only — or even, in the wider scheme, the most significant
                — catalyst for subsequent soul searching.See, for example, Matthew K.
                    Kirschenbaum's trenchant precis of this and similar detractions in his 2014
                    essay, What is Digital Humanities, And Why Are They
                        Saying Such Terrible Things About It?
                     And in some sense, Liu’s call for a
                closer critical alignment with cultural studies has been taken far more literally
                than he could have imagined. The cultural studies to which DH now finds itself in
                uneasy dialogue is not so much its later refraction in political readings of
                the artifacts of human history, but in the far more concretized politics of the 1968
                academy — a world in which a seminar that could not place itself in clear relation
                to the workers’ councils was perhaps not worth holding at all (one is reminded of
                earlier scholar-activists like Korsch and Lukács). Stephen Greenblatt recalls a
                moment from the immediate aftermath of that period in which he was attempting to
                teach Marx with, one assumes, all the nuanced ambivalence one would expect from a
                competent scholar. I remember someone finally got up and
                    screamed out in class You’re either a Bolshevik or a Menshevik — make up your
                        fucking mind
Liu was not stating the problem so starkly, and yet great swaths of the digital
                humanities community now take the questions he posed with an urgency and immediacy
                that is entirely palpable. It is now routine to begin a digital humanities
                conference with a kind of litany in which the refugee and the immigrant are
                welcomed, heteronormativity is denounced, misogyny is rejected, assaults on human
                dignity (bullying, harassment) are banned, and (at least in Canada, Australia, and
                the U.S.) the stolen lands of the First Nations are acknowledged. Such desiderata
                are quite obviously commendable (if only in intention), but that such announcements
                might well precede a discussion of machine learning and metadata highlights the
                unease. We are haunted by the thought that a woke coder or a leftist web
                    designer is simply someone who has not made up their mind whether to choose
                between Athens and Palo Alto. We wonder if the politics of tools is not an
                object of philosophical reflection on the less instrumental aspects of our
                endeavors, but, as in the double entendre of my
                title, an entirely pejorative description of our own political confusions.
Michael Oakeshott would seem a very unlikely figure in this discussion. The late work
                I consider most germane to these matters, The Politics of Faith
                    and the Politics of Skepticism, is not obviously a book about politics
                and technology at all, but rather a treatise on what he takes to be the
                    stylistic extremes of modernity as enunciated wherever (and whenever) we
                find ourselves engaged in political activity.The manuscript for The Politics of Faith and the Politics of
                            Skepticism was found among Oakeshott's papers after his death in
                        1990, and published posthumously in 1996. It is not entirely clear when it
                        was written, and while a nascent form of its ideas may be detected in an
                        essay from 1929 (Religion and the World), I
                        feel justified in considering it a late work. It is
                perhaps wise to let Oakeshott himself speak on the essential nature of these
                extremes:

                 In the politics of faith, the activity of governing is
                    understood to be in the service of the perfection of mankind. There is a
                    doctrine of cosmic optimism which, not from observation but as an inference from
                    the perfection of its creator, attributes an unavoidable perfection to the
                    universe. And there is, further, a doctrine in which human perfection appears as
                    a providential gift, assured but not deserved. But the idea of human
                    perfectibility characteristic of the politics of faith, so far from being
                    derived from either of these doctrines, is hostile to them both. In the politics
                    of faith, human perfection is sought precisely because it is not present; and
                    further, it is believed that we need not, and should not, depend upon the
                    workings of divine providence for the salvation of mankind. Human perfection is
                    to be achieved by human effort, and confidence in the evanescence of
                    imperfection springs here from faith in human power and not from trust in divine
                    providence. We may, perhaps, be permitted to encourage ourselves by believing
                    that our efforts have the approval and even the support of providence, but we
                    are to understand that the achievement of perfection depends upon our own
                    unrelaxed efforts, and that if those efforts are unrelaxed, perfection will
                        appear.
            
The politics of skepticism, by contrast, is in every way the
                    opposite:
                 [I]n the politics of skepticism governing is understood as
                        a specific activity, and in particular it is understood to be detached from
                        the pursuit of human perfection. [...] [I]n modern times, the politics of
                        skepticism (regarded as an abstract style of politics) may be said to have
                        its roots either in the radical belief that human perfection is an illusion,
                        or in the less radical belief that we know too little about the conditions
                        of human perfection for it to be wise to concentrate our energies in a
                        single direction by associating its pursuit with the activity of governing.
                        Human perfection (so the argument runs) may be evanescent, and, moreover, it
                        may be a single and simple condition of human circumstances (though this may
                        be doubted), but, even on those assumptions, to pursue perfection in one
                        direction only (and particularly to pursue it as the crow flies, regardless
                        of what there may be to do in the interval before we embrace it) is to
                        invite disappointment and (what might be worse than the mortification of
                        non-arrival) misery on the way. [...] The office of government here is not
                        be the architect of a perfect manner of living, or (as faith understands it)
                        of an improved manner of living, or even (as it turns out) of any manner of
                        living at all. [...] The skeptic in politics observes that men live in
                        proximity with one another and, pursuing various activities, are apt to come
                        into conflict with each other. And this conflict, when it reaches certain
                        dimensions, not only makes life barbaric and intolerable, but may even
                        terminate it abruptly. In this understanding of politics, then, the activity
                        of governing subsists not because it is good, but because it is necessary.
                        Its chief office is to lessen the severity of human conduct by reducing the
                        occasions of it. Upon these two
                very brief extracts from a lengthy argument, several observations must be made.
For Oakeshott, governance does not mean the particular establishment of
                constitutions, nation states, delineated systems of social order, the credos and
                platforms of political parties, or even philosophical meditations on governance as
                such. He has in mind not Who shall rule? (and by what
                warrant), but rather What shall government do?
                Political activity is conceived as the understanding and
                    care of public arrangements. Thus
                Oakeshott puts forth these two forms (or better, styles) of political
                activity as unrealizable ideals (in the Platonic sense) and as extremes that are
                neither found in unattenuated form nor without some mixture of the two occurring
                either simultaneously or in tension with one another in actual political practice.
                That is to say, we cannot locate in history a moment in which either tendency has
                entirely prevailed — and indeed, were such extremes to somehow manifest themselves
                fully, they would immediately appear as self-contradictory and logically incoherent.
                Yet at the same time, Oakeshott detects these two tendencies playing out, as a kind
                of concordia discours of the two styles, in the
                actual practice of political life over the course of the last five hundred years, as
                well as in the politics of his own day. 
                    Oakeshott is quite insistent that these two tendencies characterize political
                        modernity. He does not, for example, align Aristotle's notion of human
                        flourishing (εὐδαιμονία) as a politics of faith alternative to the politics
                        of skepticism that may well have predominated in the Greek city states (or
                        at least, he does not mention what seems to me an obvious antecedent). He
                        nonetheless admits to various manifestations of the politics of skepticism
                        prior to the early modern period, and avers that such was perhaps the
                        predominant political attitude of medieval Europe.
                
            
Faith and skepticism have obvious religious overtones, and Oakeshott
                does not deny that religion has been an important factor in modern political thought
                and practice (he even, at several points, describes the politics of faith as essentially Pelagian
                ). But close examination of these two passages will
                confirm that while a particular religious view might help to enable one or the
                other, it is just as important to notice that religious worldviews — even very
                insistent and socially totalizing ones — might inform precisely one or the
                    other at any given moment. There are as many varieties of the politics of
                faith as there are interpretations of the word perfection, and there is nothing in either notion that requires an
                explicitly religious vision. When New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg, in 2012, sought
                to ban the sale of sweetened soft drinks that exceeded 16 oz in a serving (as a
                matter of public health), he might have been engaging in something like
                the politics of faith. But among the many who accused him of instituting a nanny
                    state, no one suggested that he had spiritual salvation in mind. It is also
                not the case that either term falls neatly along the conventional axes of left and
                right. At the risk of summoning Godwin's Law, one might say that the Nazis
                horrifying vision of human perfectibility had much more to do with the
                politics of faith than its opposite (though, as Oakeshott would no doubt point out,
                the politics of skepticism is by no means absent from the on-the-ground politics of
                something like state fascism).
Again, a brief summary hardly does justice to a complex, book-length argument. But it
                is perhaps enough to orient us toward the truly provocative idea that Oakeshott
                introduces into his discussion of the two poles, which is that no serious form of
                the politics of faith can emerge without the enlistment of technology:

                 [In the early modern period], the power of government was also
                    being enlarged by the application of more efficient techniques, most of which
                    had already seen an apprenticeship in some other field of activity, in commerce
                    or in industry. Indeed, almost the whole apparatus by means of which governments
                    in our own day are able to exercise a minute control over the activities of
                    their subjects — the apparatus of banking and book-keeping, the records,
                    registers, files, passports, dossiers and indexes — was already waiting to be
                    exploited. Without ease of movement and communication, without a ready supply of
                    paper and ink, without all those reports and records which spring up whenever
                    paper, ink and human curiosity are joined, without a literate population,
                    without ready means of identification, without settled frontiers, without (in
                    short) a high degree of mastery over men and things, the prospects of the
                    politics of faith are nugatory; with them, there is little to stand in their
                    way.
            
The analogy with our contemporary moment could not be more vivid. But Oakeshott's
                boldest thesis is that technology does not come to the aid of an emergent politics
                of faith, but rather creates the conception in the first place. Those who propose a
                new form of political activity do not realize its virtues and then
                seize on the technological power that could bring it about, but instead discover a
                politics of faith precisely when, as in the early modern period, there is a remarkable and intoxicating increase of human power
                borne of technological innovation and expansion .
                States do not discover the virtues of total surveillance and then look around for
                the means by which surveillance might be undertaken, but instead discover the entire
                conception of governance as a quest for human perfectibility because the technology
                of surveillance has appeared as a new affordance.
At least two objections immediately arise.
First: If it is true that technology is logically and temporally prior to the
                politics it enables, does it not therefore become neutral? And is this not
                like saying that guns are innocent of any ethical association with murder? There are
                arguments to this effect, of course, and they are often refuted simply by noting
                that while a pistol might well be used to drive a nail, its intended use
                suggests that ethical intentions are already inscribed in the object itself. Then
                again, the idea that technologies define the regime of political activity (as
                opposed to serving as the instrumental outcome of political goals) makes some sense
                of the numerous occasions in which individual technologists appear innocent of the
                horrors with which their inventions come to be implicated. Richard Jordan Gatling
                (1818–1903), among the more important figures in the development of the modern
                machine gun, offers a classic example. Having noticed that most soldiers in the
                American Civil War were dying of sickness and disease (as opposed to gunshots):

                 It occurred to me that if I could invent a machine gun which
                    could by its rapidity of fire, enable one man to do as much battle duty as a
                    hundred, that it would, to a large extent supersede the necessity of large
                    armies, and consequently, exposure to battle and disease would be greatly
                        diminished.
            
Even if one accuses Gatling of outright moral stupidity, we are still left with the
                task of providing an account of his role in the creation of the modern screw
                propeller. That, after all, is an essential element of every nuclear submarine — a
                weapon capable of creating levels of suffering and catastrophe of which Gatling
                could not possibly have conceived. One could, indeed, multiply such examples
                endlessly. A graduate student with no other purpose save better soybean production
                invents Agent Orange. A researcher interested in studying learning, creates a tool
                (the IQ test) beloved of crazed eugenicists to this day. The first thing ever played
                over a loudspeaker to a crowd were Christmas carols; it wasn't long before Joseph
                Goebbels was among the first to realize its far more insidious capabilities. So
                while we cannot declare technology neutral, we can — at least in many cases —
                proclaim individual technologists to be, at worst, unwitting instruments of forces
                of which they are mostly unaware. Technology is not politically neutral is,
                in all such cases, a statement not about some individual mechanism, but about a
                record of instrumental usage pondered with a good deal of hindsight.
Second: Do not such technologies serve the politics of skepticism equally? Yes, but
                here Oakeschott's identification of these two tendencies as distinctive of modernity
                becomes most legible. The ancient empires maintained their vast domains under arms
                and with what methods of surveillance they could muster. But in such technologically
                    primitive circumstances, even the politics of skepticism cannot fully
                emerge. The Roman Empire (or the Persian, or the Han) could perhaps hope to avoid
                strife among a subjected people inconveniently occupying (and in many cases,
                constituting) the resources they hoped to exploit, but they could not — and over
                time, proved themselves largely unable to — develop a vision of, and a set of robust
                institutions for, the prevention of local conflict borne of nothing more than
                proximity (the imposition of peace for its own sake, or perhaps peace as
                    ideology or as normative political calculus). As for the politics of faith:
                Even if the Roman imperial cult had had any aspirations toward human perfectibility
                (and it certainly did not), it is extremely difficult to imagine how that might have
                been efficiently maintained by Rome even in the less remote regions of the empire.
                Where no obvious means are available, no obvious ends can properly emerge. Yet late
                antiquity also sees the rise of Stoicism, Epicureanism, and eventually Christianity
                as popular forms of social and religious thought. And while none of these creeds (at
                least in their original, ideal forms) ever succeeds in formulating a concrete
                political vision, one could scarcely summon more incandescent instances in which the
                perfectibility of the human person is assumed.
Finally, it is important to note that the question to which Oakeshott's thesis is
                directed is not primarily that to which the two tendencies offer themselves as
                solutions (What shall government do?), but rather as a way of explaining the
                ambivalence and ambiguity of modern political discourse. That we do not possess a
                clear scientific vocabulary with such terms as right,
                justice,
                order,
                freedom,
                democracy,
                socialism, or, for that matter, governance (one could extend this list
                infinitely) is a function of the fact that all such terms are ever destined to serve
                two masters. Each appears — with radically different meanings — in both the politics
                of faith and the politics of skepticism. Attempts to specify them further with
                supposedly more precise adjectives — natural rights,
                democratic socialism,
                individual freedom — only serve to deepen the rift. Nowhere is
                this more evident than in the term social justice as used in contemporary
                anglophone political discourse. Those more aligned with the politics of faith would
                very much like the adjective social to act as a useful clarification, and
                even perhaps to render the entire term slightly innocuous (who, after all, could
                object to a just society?). For those inspired by skepticism, though, the
                term is an obvious shibboleth suggestive of an entirely activist and progressive
                stance. For some, the term can only be employed with yet another qualification:
                    the social justice warrior who takes up arms against all
                that is good and decent in a politics manifestly focused on what is traditional and
                sensible.
It should surprise us not at all, though, to discover that our own political
                aspirations as academics — our desire to be politically relevant and politically
                engaged — is a technologically-enabled manifestation of the politics of faith. The
                humanities, and in particular, the humanities as it is practiced and taught in
                higher education, has seldom had any other goal than the cultivation of human
                    consciousness. And by consciousness, we of course mean, quite
                unapologetically, better and higher consciousness. Other reasons might
                be summoned. Good citizenship is still frequently mentioned, and preparation
                for more concrete endeavors (law, business, medicine, or ministry) remains a sturdy
                rationale in some quarters. But all such teleologies only reframe the centrality of
                    consciousness or awareness as ends in themselves. Art for art's
                sake (we can substitute any humanistic discipline we like for art in this
                venerable formulation) is perhaps a part of the calculation for some, but even the
                most ardent admirers of Shakespeare will surely see the absurdity of spending
                enormous sums of money in order to provide their children with four years of
                aesthetic rapture. If politics is our goal, the elitism of this proverb becomes
                self-refuting. Yet the study of literature and art, culture and history, philosophy
                and politics — even in their most narrow and specialized forms — can all be enfolded
                into the capacious realm of consciousness. If the humanities has a politics,
                it is a politics that relies heavily on the idea of human perfectibility. Skeptics
                we may be, but we are not practitioners of the politics of skepticism.
                Perhaps in other times and places, it has been precisely the purpose of higher
                education to do nothing more than fecklessly maintain existing structures bent on no
                more noble purpose than maintaining order within an eternally defective human
                community. But the humanities in particular — understood in as broad a way as
                possible — has perhaps never known such an academy, or has known it only as its
                natural enemy.
But it is not our liberalism that makes this assignation relevant. The
                humanities has certainly also known, in prior ages, a politics of faith with
                entirely conservative ends in mind. Humanistic education has very often been
                conceived precisely as a way of policing racial, religious, gender, and class
                boundaries with the quite obvious goal of perfecting those who are conceived
                as worthy of perfection, and who will perforce rule those less enlightened. Even the
                apparent move to popularize humanistic knowledge that prevailed in the first half of
                the twentieth century in both the U.S. and the U.K. (Great
                    Books of the Western World, the launch of Penguin Books, The Loeb Classical Library) left no doubt as to who was
                properly in charge of perfection.
The trouble, of course, is that the humanities are hardly the only manifestation of
                the politics of faith in modern society. For surely, one could not find a more
                luminous example of the politics of faith than Silicon Valley and all its works. We
                are subjected daily to its inexorable reframing of human desire and human potential
                — a torrent of apps and sites focused not merely on idle pleasures and
                diversions, but (more crucially) on wellness; on the virtues of being
                hyper-informed and aware of whatever occupies the instant; on the transhuman fantasy
                of the quantified self; on the essential excellence of various
                    balances (work/life, self/other, body/spirit); on happiness in the
                fullest, and even the most ancient sense of the word; and, of course,
                    productivity as a morally efficacious activity. Such bids for human
                perfectibility are irreducibly voluntarist in almost every sense of the term. In
                fact, they are so committed to the idea that our beliefs are entirely ours to choose
                without interference, that it is not even clear that those who are manifestly
                engaged in the manipulation of our desires and beliefs regard it as manipulation.
                Within the totalizing logic of the market, one experiences coercion as merely the
                marriage of two freedoms: the freedom to buy and the freedom to sell. That this will
                absolutely lead to the purchase of many more iPhones escapes no one at all; the only
                question is how to expand this logic further afield, so that more might come to know
                the salvation on offer. The anxious ethical dilemmas of former ages can be dispensed
                with in a phrase: Don't be evil.
Both visions are enabled by the same sources of power: the banking and book-keeping, the records, registers, files, passports, dossiers
                    and indexes.
                 Or rather, by the intoxicating
                    increase of their digital successors: the
                user profiles, digital signatures, and network graphs; the mining and the analytics;
                the ability not only to account for the present, but perhaps even to predict the
                future (the heretofore unattainable dream of every king). The corporatization
                of the university is, in fact, precisely this: a conception of the way we undertake
                political arrangements within the university now made available by data, metrics, a
                concern with measurable outcomes, and the (invariably digital) tools that have
                brought these affordances into view.
Still, if the matter of how one uses the tools has any intelligibility at all
                (as a spectrum of ethical choices and options), that intelligibility lies mainly
                with the perfectibility one has in mind. And on this point, Silicon Valley and the
                humanistic academy are almost incommensurable paradigms. Where the one posits a
                genial and mostly circumscribed wellness, the other repeatedly and eternally
                offers the same as speculation and question. One has a short attention span; the
                other remains irrefragably committed to the longue
                    durée. One quantifies the self; the other complicates it and
                rediscovers it. One loves binary terms; the other approaches them archly and with
                suspicion. Voluntaristic conceptions of belief (says Humanitas) are just so many shadows on the wall of the cave; one can
                scarcely imagine a class in the humanities that does not begin with the observation
                of its fatuousness and propose a journey (however tortuous an inconclusive) upward.
                That it is not possible to discover in the tools themselves
                some sort of political meaning that is ontologically prior to these commitments
                should perhaps not deter us from declaring them not politically neutral, but
                it should render a great number of common statements about the politics of tools at
                least banal if not tautological. It matters not at all that one might compose either
                    Mein Kampf
                or the Sermon on the Mount using a word processor. It might matter a
                great deal that neither one, as a matter of historical fact, was produced with this
                particular technology. To speak of such matters is not to locate one means with two
                entirely different ends, but rather two means fully and distinctly defined by ends
                that are not entirely void of metaphysical similarity.
None of this absolves digital humanities of anything. Even with radically different —
                and even opposed — teleologies in view, the fact that so many of our tools and
                techniques are handed to us by an industry with its own distinct politics of faith
                suggests, at least, a hardy vigilance. That we might merely advance and channel, and
                thus fail to resist, today's great postindustrial, neoliberal,
                    corporate, and global flows of information-cum-capital remains a possibility. But the mere use of digital tools
                does not automatically forecast that failure, and the adumbration of a supposedly
                    activist form of digital humanities work does not guarantee success. If
                that failure were to come, it could only come from a disavowal of the far grander
                aims of the humanities itself. Breaking faith with that vision, however
                ramified in its possibilities and articulations, would be devastating indeed. At the
                edge of that event horizon, digital humanities would not even succeed in being what
                its most bitter detractors imagine it to be. At that point, no one would be capable
                of asking the questions Liu asks, because digital humanities will have become
                something far worse than a paradox or an oxymoron. It will have become the quaint
                term of art once used by a benighted group who still believed that the humanities
                had purpose and meaning. On that day, the global flows of information-cum-capital —
                pursuing faith or skepticism as they please — will have presumably won.
Oakeshott's formulation is extreme, because it suggests that the intoxicating increase of technological
                power is not some new affordance toward which the humanities may stand in some
                merely practical or instrumental way. On this account, one might say that the
                expansion of technological power created the digital humanities — making it not only
                possible, but conceivable. And following that thought to its conclusion, we find
                that the term tool is itself among the ambivalent and ambiguous terms of its
                political discourse, ever ready to be taken one way or another as one conceives or
                reconceives the nature of the humanities itself. Oakeshott, though, would claim a
                virtue in such ambiguity:

                 Politics is a conversation between diverse interests, in which
                    activities that circumstantially limit one another are saved from violent
                    collision; and here, words (words, indeed, which have a continuous range of
                    meaning in which the extreme meanings are mediated to one another) may sometimes
                    serve our turn better than a scientific vocabulary designed to exclude all
                    doubleness.
            
To ask What is the politics of tools? is to ask a question as rife with
                possibility — and confusion — as What is justice? or What is
                    democracy? We sense that there are such things as justice and democracy, and
                we likewise suspect that tools have a politics. But as with justice and
                democracy, one might more profitably ask what underlies our deployment of tools as
                political interventions.
Perhaps this is only to restate Liu’s complaint in slightly different terms.
                Certainly, nothing in the preceding discussion lessens the urgency of our need to
                avoid just pressing the execute button on our projects. Still, one must
                acknowledge that accurate assessment of the political meaning of our tools is no
                easy matter, and certainly not a simple matter of, as Liu put it, scaling our thinking about metadata into thinking critically about the power, finance, and other governance
                    protocols of the world. If, in fact, it is true
                that our tool-building, while favoring a politics of faith, cannot define or predict
                the specific political arrangements that may later arise, we should perhaps be most
                circumspect not when we are tempted to imagine our efforts to be neutral, but rather
                when we imagine our tools to be acts of resistance or outright political
                activism. The former indicates a fallacy to which any humanist at all is hopefully
                alive; the latter, though, reflects a potentially more dangerous naiveté about the
                outworkings of power. Ethical thinking, political responsibility, and critique are
                undoubtedly obligations of the present. But thinking critically about the politics
                of our tools must surely also mean a certain skepticism toward the essential
                goodness of what we are doing. The future that awaits may well realize entire
                political formations on the basis of our endeavors; they may also, despite our best
                efforts and loudest protestations, turn our efforts to political ends entirely
                opposed to those for which we now long.
