Title:  How to Do Things with
               Deep Learning Code
Volume:  017
Issue:  2
Date:  22 June 2023
Abstract:  
            
            The premise of this article is that a basic understanding of the composition and
               functioning of large language models is critically urgent. To that end, we extract a
               representational map of OpenAI’s GPT-2 with what we articulate as two classes of deep
               learning code, that which pertains to the model and that which underwrites
               applications built around the model. We then verify this map through case studies of
               two popular GPT-2 applications: the text adventure game, AI
                  Dungeon, and the language art project, This Word Does
                  Not Exist. Such an exercise allows us to test the potential of Critical
               Code Studies when the object of study is deep learning code and to demonstrate the
               validity of code as an analytical focus for researchers in the subfields of Critical
               Artificial Intelligence and Critical Machine Learning Studies. More broadly, however,
               our work draws attention to the means by which ordinary users might interact with,
               and even direct, the behavior of deep learning systems, and by extension works toward
               demystifying some of the auratic mystery of AI. What is at stake is the
               possibility of achieving an informed sociotechnical consensus about the responsible
               applications of large language models, as well as a more expansive sense of their
               creative capabilities — indeed, understanding how and where engagement occurs allows
               all of us to become more active participants in the development of machine learning
               systems.
         
Full Body Text: 

            
            
               Screen capture from This Word Does Not
                  Exist
               
               Dictionary definition of the phrase deep learning code which reads
                     1. a set of instructions that are learned using a high
                     level of detail, such as to interpret information and modify systems. 2. a word
                     that probably exists; with an alternative definition made by a machine learning
                     algorithm.
            
         

            1. Overview
            The public conversation about large language models is nothing if not riddled with
               sensation. Even apart from OpenAI’s already-notorious ChatGPT, or a Google engineer’s
               claim of sentience for its conversational model, the reporting on research advances
               in Natural Language Processing (NLP) almost inevitably cultivates some degree of
               alarm and auratic mystery. Some of this affect is generalizable to the field of
               artificial intelligence, which continues to be overcoded as a dangerous and
               impenetrable black box. But the enclosure of the NLP research environment behind
               Application Programming Interfaces (APIs), and the concomitant development of
               language models requiring compute resources beyond the means of ordinary users, has
               also contributed to the mystification. For example, even though OpenAI’s GPT-3
                  is now integrated within applications spanning disparate domains and industries,
                  as of this writing it remains accessible to the general public only through an
                  Application Programming Interface (API) , and
                  operationally legible only through experiments done by researchers 
                   or attempts at replicating its source code . Paradigmatic headlines such as A.I. Is Mastering Language. Should We Trust What It
                  Says?
                communicate the threat of a singular, mystified, and
               unstoppable thing called AI, with humans relegated to the role of end users.
               One salient question for researchers, then, is how best to demystify large language
               models and explain their functioning, not only to help shape a sociotechnical
               consensus about their responsible application but also to help expand the horizon of
               possibility for human engagement, beyond instrumental use and risk assessment alike. 
            While there are technical methods to explain and understand language models —
               so-termed BERTology is one example
                  BERTology
                  is a field that studies the specific components of language models such as hidden
                  states and weights. Another example of a project endeavoring to explain language
                  models is Ecco, an open-source library for the creation of interfaces that help to
                  explain language models like GPT-2 by illuminating input saliency and neuron
                  activation ; a third is Looking inside
                     neural nets. — the occasion of a scholarly conversation about
               Critical Code Studies (CCS) suggests a particular research question: What can be
               learned about machine learning systems when the techniques and lessons of CCS are
               applied at the level of code rather than theory? As the full range of contributions
               to this special issue attests, CCS applies critical hermeneutics to software code,
               documentation, structure, and frameworks. Among the more prominent case studies in
               the aforementioned are readings of BASIC, Perl, JavaScript, and C++ programs, all
               exercises in excavating the meanings or structures of signification that are both
               latent in and produced by code (e.g. ). This method
               has been developed for and honed on programmed code: words, characters,
               and symbols arranged according to rules and in a form that might be understood as
               textual. CCS in other words has traditionally grappled with artifacts that, while
               certainly mobile and changeable, have enough of a static quality to allow both for
               individual study and shared understanding. What though can this method do with
               machine learning systems that include code in this ordinary sense as well as
               statistical parameters and operations, that are in other words less lexical than they
               are mathematical? While we had previously expressed skepticism about the efficacy and
               utility of taking a CCS approach to a language model such as GPT-2 , we were challenged for this special issue to do
               precisely that: to consider the extent to which CCS might illuminate a system, either
               in terms of intent or functioning, that is comprised not just of code but also
               training data, model architecture, and mathematical transformations — to consider
               then if its methodology might be adapted for the study of an interactive system that
               is not strictly algorithmic.
            In the wake of CCS, as well as Software Studies and Platform Studies, the subfield of
               Critical Artificial Intelligence Studies (CAIS) has emerged explicitly to take
               account of machine learning. CAIS calls for an end-to-end engagement and insists on
               the model as the unit of analysis. Even if not self-consciously
               presented as a field articulation, academic studies of machine learning have
               collectively shifted the emphasis away from code and toward the model, with a
               particular emphasis on vectorization, probabilitization, and generalization. Adrian
               Mackenzie, for example, asserts that code alone cannot fully
                  diagram how machine learners make programs or how they combine knowledge with
                  data
               . And in what may well become a
               foundational document for CAIS as such, in a so-termed incursion
               into the field, researcher attention is redirected from an
                  analytical world of the algorithm to the world of the
                     model, a relatively inert, sequential, and/or recurrent structure
                  of matrices and vectors
               . What this means more plainly is
               that CAIS concerns itself not with the code that implements a particular machine
               learning model, but rather its mathematical definition, not with symbolic logical diagrams but rather statistical
                  algorithmic diagrams
               . Deep learning code is thus positioned as
               merely one component of machine learning systems and not by itself granted priority.
               In contrast, we proceed from the observation that deep learning code in fact
               represents the myriad possible implementations of a machine learning
               model and its auxiliary programs. On this basis, we contend that the design choice
               and biases inherent in each implementation extend their significance beyond
               mathematical formulae and warrant a closer look. 
            While the model has tended to serve as the unit of analysis, the broader
               concern of CAIS has been to situate these models in their social, historical, and
               cultural contexts 
               
               
               
               
               . Linking model architecture to context — whether that be
               use case, domain of implementation, or institutional setting — has thus allowed CAIS
               to pose crucial questions about the ethics and politics of machine learning systems.
               So too CCS has endeavored to engage both the socio-historical dimensions and effects
               of programming code, also with structural transformation as a hoped-for endgame . What remains to be done, and what is in part the purpose
               of our essay, is to test both the feasibility as well as the critical potential of
               CCS as a method when the object of study is deep learning code. 
            This then is our cue to take a closer look at one of the central terms for this
               analysis: code. While the discipline of Computer Science classifies different
               algorithms according to their composition and behavior (e.g. binary search,
               breadth-first search, insertion sort), there is no master deep learning
               algorithm, apart from frequently-used algorithms like backpropagation and
               domain-specific optimization procedures like gradient descent 
               . Deep learning code, then, is not homogenous or
               singular, a point underscored by the many iterations of single models, e.g. the GPT
               and DALL-E series. In the popular imaginary, deep learning, or AI as a cultural
               technique, might seem to adhere to the myth of unitary
                  simplicity and computational purity
               , but in actual practice it is a collection of disparate
               processes that work toward the production of prediction
               .
            Along these lines, Mackenzie has written of the difficulty of locating the difference
               between a game console and something like Google’s AlphaGo in program code,
               suggesting that researchers must look elsewhere to understand the particularities of
               a machine learning system . He then goes
               further to articulate a limit for CCS that we accept as a challenge: the writing performed by machine learners, he contests,
                  cannot be read textually or procedurally as programs might be
                  read. This is the case, he notes, because the
                  learning or making by learning is far from homogenous, stable, or automatic in
                  practice
               . That CCS as a method is somewhat
               mismatched or misaligned with technical objects whose behavior is defined by
               numerical parameters and vectors rather than logical symbols is further evinced by
               Jenna Burrell’s audit of the code of a spam filtering model: as that audit
               exercise illustrates, seeking to understand the rationale for classification
               decisions inevitably imposes a process of human interpretive
                  reasoning on a mathematical process of statistical optimization
               . For completeness, we remark that machine learning
                  research has traditionally used the concept of inductive bias to describe the set
                  of assumptions that a learning algorithm makes to predict outputs for inputs that
                  it has not previously encountered . For example, the
                  inductive bias of a nearest neighbor algorithm corresponds to the assumption that
                  the class of an instance x will be most similar to the class of other
                  instances that are nearby in Euclidean distance .
                  Thus, the inductive bias of a learning algorithm loosely corresponds to its
                  interpretation of the training data to make decisions about new data. Using this
                  formulation, one might begin to see how an interpretation of deep learning
                  decision-making might be possible. In contrast, Tom Mitchell observes that
                        it is difficult to characterize precisely the
                        inductive bias of BACKPROPAGATION learning, because it depends on the
                        interplay between the gradient descent search and the way in which the
                        weight space spans the space of representable functions. However, one can
                        roughly characterize it as smooth interpolation between data
                           points
                      Inductive bias, then, is not the answer to
                  the methodological challenge to which we are responding. The problems of
                  interpretability and explainability are also crucial for deep learning, but not
                  within the immediate purview of this paper. For an overview see 
                  . Deep learning objects that entail parallel
               processes and training schemes may indeed be challenging to read procedurally as CCS
               might read JavaScript; however, as we will endeavor to demonstrate, they can
               nonetheless be read textually and separately from their operations and mathematical
               foundations. 
            The common understanding of deep learning code is that it is an implementation of a
               deep learning model and ancillary functions that support the model, written in a
               specific programming language. Within the scope of our paper, these models are taken
               to be deep neural networks, specifically the Transformer architecture . In what follows, we will extract a representational
               map of a particular deep learning model with an open GitHub repository — GPT-2 —
               based on a close reading of two classes of code, that which pertains to the model and
               that which underwrites applications, thus countering the notion that deep learning
               code is uniform and homogenous. This representational map will in turn draw attention
               to the means by which we might oversee, interact with, and even direct the behavior
               of deep learning systems, and by extension both empirically rebut the fantasy of
               model sentience and demystify some of the auratic mystery of AI. To test our
               theory, we present case studies of two popular GPT-2 applications — the text
               adventure game, AI Dungeon, and the conceptual artwork,
                  This Word Does Not Exist — both of which demonstrate
               the interplay between what we will articulate as two classes of deep learning
               code.
         

            2. Mapping Deep Learning Code
            
               GPT-2’s source files in alphabetical order within its GitHub repository
               
               A GitHub commit with five Python files
            
            Our critical study of GPT-2’s source code begins with its GitHub repository and a
               classification of its code (Figure 2). Contained in the repository is a README
               summary, as well as a creative license, requirements file, and a source code folder
               containing five separate Python files: (1) model.py, as its name suggests, is the
               kernel of language models such as the GPT series, and it contains functions that
               define hyperparameters, softmax transformations, attention heads, and a number of
               familiar deep learning operations; (2) sample.py, also as its name suggests, samples
               a sequence of text from the model; (3) encoder.py both tokenizes text for model input
               and decodes text from model output; (4) interactive_conditional_samples.py generates
               samples with an initial prompt; and (5) generate_unconditional_samples.py generates
               samples without an initial prompt.To be technically precise, an
                     <|endoftext|> token is used as a way to partition training data
                  and separate different texts. Thus, generate_unconditional_samples.py
                  generates samples from an initial <|endoftext|> token, which is
                  essentially nothing. Deep learning code, like other software
               systems, can be metaphorically conceived in terms of layers: the model layer that
               defines the deep learning model and the application layer that primarily interacts
               with users or external software. Conceptually straddling the model and application
               layers are sample.py and encoder.py, which perform mediating functions that will
               become more evident in our subsequent discussion of GPT-2. (These latter functions
               are harder to classify because it remains an open question whether code that samples
               text from the model or encodes user input and decodes model output is considered part
               of the model or ancillary functions that support it.) What is somewhat surprising —
               and what in hindsight might have tempered the feverish reaction to ChatGPT in late
               2022, had the chatbot been primarily understood as an application or interface — is
               that there is as yet no common taxonomy or representational map that differentiates
               the functions and structures representative of deep learning from the functions and
               structures that are integral, but not particular, to the implementation of deep
               learning models. 
            To that end, we will articulate as a heuristic a practical and conceptual distinction
               between two classes of code: core deep learning code (CDLC), kernel code
               that defines the deep learning model, and ancillary deep learning code
               (ADLC), ancillary or application code that ordinary developers can replace.
                  Core deep learning code, of which model.py is the obvious primary
               instance, has an ordinary and domain-specific meaning: it produces machine learning
               predictions by implementing deep learning operations.For example, matrices
                  feature prominently in core deep learning code because they are used to implement
                  the layers of a neural network. Arithmetic operations are also a frequent
                  occurrence, but are often performed with matrices rather than single numbers. In
                  fact, matrix multiplication is an operation so integral to a neural network’s
                  predictive capabilities that there exists specialized hardware to optimize
                  it. Hence, core encompasses core data structures and functions
               that directly execute core deep learning tasks such as classification or regression.
               In contrast, the remaining files in the source code folder operationalize the model’s
               outputs rather than directly contribute to its predictive functioning. They are in
               this respect ancillary, querying or indirectly supporting the model from
               an external location and, in the case of GPT-2, acting as interfaces that mediate
               between user requests and deep learning predictions (e.g. specifying and wrangling
               behaviors, or filtering outputs, as with the aggregating of individual predictions
               into the composite form of a news article, poem, recipe, or adventure game). 
            In this paper, we primarily consider the significance of ancillary code as a
               post-prediction apparatus, that is, code that is run after a prediction has been
               made. However, it is important to emphasize that ancillary code surrounds the model,
               and can thus also interact with the model at the start of the production of
               prediction. As we will explain, code such as the web scraper that was used to
               generate GPT-2’s training data might also be considered as pre-prediction ancillary
               code with its own politics and significance. Although web scrapers can be used for
               tasks other than compiling training data, those that are used for this purpose are
               situated within the context of deep learning, and hence can also be considered deep
               learning code. 
            Our delineation of the two classes of code is motivated by their distinct empirical
               and theoretical properties. Thus, while deep learning code is often regarded as
               uniform, even basic — Mackenzie, for example, defines standard machine learning code
               as familiar, generic programming that is hardly ever hermetically opaque — our analysis complicates
               this characterization . To start, we note
               that CDLC and ADLC emerge from, and to some degree reflect, different computing
               practices: artificial intelligence (AI) on the one hand and software development on
               the other. While CDLC is informed by the development of rules for modifying the connection strengths in simulated networks of
                  artificial neurons
               , as well as specialized hardware and software
               libraries capable of efficiently performing repetitive matrix operations (most
               notably, AI-accelerated hardware from NVIDIA and Google and software libraries such
               as Tensorflow and Keras), ADLC in contrast draws from a rich history of web
               development, APIs, and user interface design, depending on the form that it takes
               (e.g. a web application that allows users to chat with GPT-2, or an API that allows
               programmers to send requests to GPT-3 for prediction). Given these different
               historical trajectories, there is enough of a practical difference to explain why
               CDLC and ADLC seem in their programming conventions, vocabularies, and syntax almost
               to be different languages, both in their look and how they are read. In a nutshell:
               whereas the complexity of CDLC stems from the complexity of machine learning
               structures such as neural networks and procedures such as backpropagation, the
               complexity of ADLC arises from what it does with the machine learning output, such as
               integrating the outputs into other complex systems — for our purposes, a
               GPT-2-powered web app that needs to be accessed concurrently by thousands of users. A
               textual comparison of model.py (CDLC) and interactive_conditional_samples.py (ADLC)
               in GPT-2 will help reinforce the distinction. 
            Whereas interactive_conditional_samples.py defines a single function with a specific
               purpose, model.py in contrast is filled with functions that contain numerous
               technical and mathematical operations whose meanings may not be initially obvious to
               non-programmers. Although interactive_conditional_samples.py starts out with a fair
               bit of technical setup code, its main loop (lines 72 - 88) clearly communicates the
               module’s purpose. The module prompts for and saves user input into a variable named
               raw_text (line 73), encodes (line 77) and feeds it to the model (lines 80 - 82), and
               decodes (line 85) and prints the output iteratively (lines 86 - 87) (Figure 3). The
               translational work ADLC does here is facilitated by the presence of built-in Python
               functions (input, print) and intuitively-named functions (encode, decode). In fact,
               this syntactic composition is what marks ADLC as such. This generic program is easy
               to understand in GPT-2’s case because it executes basic operations while outsourcing
               the predictive work to model.py, which handles the complex deep learning work.
                  Our claims about the legibility of source code written in Python rely on a
                  distinction between a novice programmer who understands basic principles such as
                  conditional statements and loops and a data scientist who works with neural
                  networks, especially one with a deep understanding ofTransformers and
                  GPT-2. We can then, to a certain extent, imagine the execution of
               interactive_conditional_samples.py as we read the code.
            
               Snippet of interactive_conditional_samples.py
               
               Several lines of code in an editor
            
            In contrast, model.py itself has a complex structure and vocabulary that makes
               comprehension, and interpretation, especially demanding. The imaginative exercise for
               the execution of model.py’s predictive process is more challenging due to its
               dependence on vast arrays of numbers and their complex interactions. In addition, at
               any one time the model could conceivably be in several different possible states as
               determined by its weights, leading to different outputs given a particular
                  input. Making a related point, Burrell suggests that it is not productive
                  ultimately to apply interpretation to mathematical optimization, or to attempt to
                  parse the decision-making logic of a neural network — in our terms, CDLC — because
                  of its escalating complexity: reasoning about, debugging, or
                     improving the algorithm becomes more difficult with more qualities or
                     characteristics provided as inputs, each subtly and imperceptibly shifting the
                     resulting classification
                  .  The code looks significantly
               different from interactive_conditional_samples.py because of its almost exclusive
               dependence on Tensorflow, Google Brain’s machine learning library, which features a
               host of abstruse-sounding functions, the relative obscurity of which is a necessary
               product of their specialized and optimized functioning. The relative illegibility of
               GPT-2’s CDLC can partly be attributed to the developers’ programming style and the
               demanding requirements of production code. GPT-2 was written not as a hobbyist
               project but as a service provider for numerous applications, so while it could have
               been written using many more loops and basic data structures, it would then have
               taken much longer to train and run. Nevertheless, we can see that the file is
               arranged into a series of Python functions (softmax, norm, attention_mask, etc.) and
               smaller data structures that together form the network representation of GPT-2. We
               can also review the code and derive a sense of the operations being performed (e.g.
               matrix multiplication, reshapes), but the calculations being performed would be too
               massive for any one person to parse. Even if a reader were familiar with the
               functions, in other words, GPT-2 is better studied through its mathematical
               formulation than through its implementation. Consider, for example, the line of code
                  0.5*x*(1+tf.tanh(np.sqrt(2/np.pi)*(x+0.044715*tf.pow(x,
                  3)))) to describe GELU (an activating function frequently used in neural
               networks), which is much easier to parse if read as a math formula.
            The complexity of model.py, and more broadly the inability to fully examine its
               execution, does not however mean that one cannot study the intricacies of deep
               learning systems, either technically or critically. For this purpose, we can take a
               cue from computer science and apply the concept of abstraction to our
               analysis. Because fundamental deep learning operations such as vectorization,
               learning, and gradient descent exist in the mathematical abstract without programming
               implementation, it is possible to talk about them without citing the underlying
                  code.See  and  for an emerging mathematical theory and theoretical treatment (respectively) of
                  deep learning. See  and 
                  for core texts on machine learning and deep learning. One could make the
               argument that all computer code subtends abstract math, but the challenge of
               understanding CDLC has meant that abstraction has almost necessarily been at the core
               of the study of deep learning operations. For example, research on machine learning
               models has thus far focused on the diagram ,
               vectorization 
               , learning , and pattern recognition 
               . In contrast, the abstract
               counterpart of ADLC is not prominently featured in analyses of deep learning. Put
               another way, the possibility of analyzing model.py and its operations analogically
               and metaphorically has already been proven by extensive qualitative engagement with
               deep learning. While we by no means wish to dismiss or even contest the project of
               CAIS — abstracting deep learning operations is after all foundational to the work of
               interpretation — we can nonetheless ask what is missed if researchers only focus on
               training data, model architecture, and the abstraction of deep learning
                  code.Training data is one of the more urgent, as well as more visible,
                  problems necessitating critical intervention, of which Joy Buolamwini and Timnit
                  Gebru’s work is particularly of note .
            Although we have suggested that ADLC looks like generic programming, it is important
               to note that its substance and significance differs by operational context. As a
               thought experiment, consider the loop, the signature feature of which, as Wilfried
               Hou Je Bek explains, is the minimal means that result in
                  automated infinite production
               . This infinite production is trivial in the context of
               a small computer program that prints out numbers from one to ten, and has historical
               precedents in automation and mechanical reproduction, but takes on a more sinister
               value in the contexts of disinformation, hate speech, or even autonomous weaponry.
               These then are the stakes for a CCS analysis of ancillary deep learning code, which
               operates outside the periphery of a deep learning model but is fundamental to its
               operation. 
            Our premise, then, is that analysis grounded in code citation has perhaps too quickly
               been deemed inessential to the work of understanding and engaging artificial
               intelligence. More specifically, our suggestion is that ADLC is productive terrain
               for critical and creative engagement, not least because its structure, logic, and
               syntactic form is closer to human language than CDLC.There may well be examples
                  of creative developers who have tried to bend the rules at the level of the model
                  in the creation of innovative deep learning structures and operations, e.g. the
                  attention mechanism in the Transformer network. It is also perfectly reasonable to
                  expect to see interesting code comments in both CDLC and ADLC (although in our
                  experience it is not common for the former). We stand by our initial observation
                  that it would be much more difficult and time-intensive to apply the CCS framework
                  to study CDLC, but we also think it would be a generative exercise for future
                  research. For this paper, however, we choose to focus on what is in our view the
                  more manifestly creative area of deep learning code: ADLC. While the
               predictive outputs of CDLC, particularly model.py, are in the form of unprocessed
               numerical data, ADLC does the heavy lifting of translating and assigning meaning to
               that numerical data.Consider the example of a classifier like Logistic
                  Regression trained to classify tumors: depending on the data, the two outputs
                  might be 0 or 1, which would not be meaningful without assigning them respective
                  values of benign and malignant. Such a classification would be necessarily
                  arbitrary and this serves as a reminder of the real interpretive work that happens
                  in the use of ADLC to transform numerical output into linguistic form. This notion
                  of transformation is especially compelling in the context of deep learning because
                  so many transformations have to take place in order for a prediction to be made.
                  Data extracted from an external source must be cleaned and formatted before it can
                  be used to train a model, and an input requiring a predicted output must also be
                  cleaned and would be transformed into numerous vector spaces as it is fed through
                  the model. Because CDLC replicates or maps mathematical formulas and deep
               learning concepts (e.g. code that implements a layer of a neural network), the
               interpretive work is seemingly limited to the implementation details, as in the
               choice of framework or programming language. ADLC, on the other hand, can be used to
               interpret and manipulate the raw output in seemingly unlimited ways, and it is this
               creative and ethicopolitical potential that makes it a particularly fertile area for
               CCS analysis. In the following sections, we trace examples of ADLC doing this
               transformative work with increasing levels of complexity and identify two of its
               major functions in the context of a text adventure game and a fictional dictionary:
               structuring the output from GPT-2 and constructing interfaces that mediate between
               the user and the language model.
            Our analysis starts with a closer look at GPT-2’s ADLC to help illustrate the
               argument and suggest possibilities of thinking both logically and intuitively about
               it. ADLC is an accessible, and replaceable, component of GPT-2’s source. Removing the
               two files, generate_unconditional_samples.py and interactive_conditional_samples.py,
               would thus not affect GPT-2’s production of prediction, and in fact most forks of
               GPT-2’s source code replace the files with the programmer’s own interface. If
               considered in relation to word vectors and the attention mechanism,
               generate_unconditional_samples.py’s printing of GPT-2’s outputs might be regarded as
               a somewhat fundamental and trivial operation. But printing GPT-2’s output is only one
               implementation of ADLC’s mediation between user prompts and parameters (length of
               sample, number of samples, randomness) and model parameters (length, nsamples,
               temperature) — and other implementations, other forms of interaction, as we will
               outline, are both more interesting and more generative. Regarding GPT-2 as an
               interactive system rather than an algorithm, with ADLC as the front-facing interface
               for an underlying language model, allows us to explore the possibilities as well as
               limits of ADLC with respect to controlling GPT-2’s behaviors. That is, the behavior
               of GPT-2, as the user experiences it, can be understood to be configured by its
               myriad interfaces rather than its internal predictive logic engine, which is itself
               only limited to one behavior: text generation. These interfaces extend GPT-2’s
               behavioral capacity and transform text generation into media generation, interactive
               entertainment, and collaborative writing. Put another way, although GPT-2 is a
               language model that generates text sequences, it takes specific examples of ADLC in
               order for GPT-2 to function as a news writer, dungeon master, chat bot, or language
               artist, as it is imagined to do for AI Dungeon, This Word Does Not Exist, and many other applications
               besides.
            It is perhaps an understatement to note that the playful quality of these two
               applications is somewhat at odds with the instrumentalist quality of GPT-2’s ADLC.
               For a field such as CCS, which has historically been attuned to the rhetorical
               properties of code and to what makes it interesting as a cultural artifact — not only
               its literariness and humor but also its political potential, one excellent example of
               which is the CCS working group’s discussion of gender and The Apollo 11 Guidance Computer (AGC) Code — the relative dryness of
               GPT-2’s source might initially cause some perplexity. There are no unreadable texts,
               to be sure, but there might seem to be limits to what can be said about numerical
               data and code that bears no traces of programmer whimsy and is absent not only of
               cultural references, in-jokes, and easter eggs, but also of manifest traces of
               authorship and subjectivity, apart from the occasional typographical error.
               Counter-intuitive as it may seem, however, even a snippet of ADLC can be remarkably
               generative. If, for example, the code for a mobile phone application can be read as
               an instantiation of an argument about immigration and border politics , we might by extension consider how a line such as if 0, continues to generate samples [indefinitely] opens up
               philosophical and political questions of control.
            
               Snippet in the sample_model function within
                  generate_unconditional_samples.py
               
               a code snippet reading :nsamples=0 : Number of samples
                     to return, if 0, continues to generate samples indefinitely."
            
             This snippet of generate_unconditional_samples.py comes from the function
               sample_model’s docstring and explains how the nsamples parameter is used to specify
               the number of samples that GPT-2 generates (Figure 4).GPT-2’s internal model of
                  the English language relies on the assumption that the current words in a sentence
                  determine the occurrence of subsequent words . At each
                  prediction time step, GPT-2 outputs the probability of every textual unit in its
                  vocabulary (50,257 for the smallest model) given the previous words in a sequence.
                  While a common observation of GPT-2 in action might be that it is writing,
                  then, what it is actually doing is sampling, by which we mean the drawing
                  of a random observation from a probability distribution. Dictated by Python
               conventions, a docstring is a block of text nested within a function that acts as an
               explanatory summary, and thus can be studied under the same critical apparatus as
               software paratexts and code comments 
               . The snippet is taken from the file,
               generate_unconditional_samples.py, which allows for the most rudimentary form of
               interaction between a user and GPT-2. After configuring a few parameters such as
               random seed, model size, and length and number of samples to generate, and then
               executing the program, generate_unconditional_samples.py will continue to print
               samples to the console in the format below until the maximum number of samples
               specified is reached (Figure 5). 
            
               Reconstruction of GPT-2’s outputs printed to the console
               
               Two samples of outputs
            
            This prescribed limit is particularly suggestive because the original developers
               effectively designed a way for it to be circumvented. As line 70 of the code
               indicates, GPT-2 will continue to predict and print samples unless one of two
               conditions is true: (1) the number of samples generated exceeds the nsamples
               limit or (2) the nsamples limit supplied is zero (Figure 6). Thus, if
                  nsamples were zero, GPT-2 would print samples indefinitely until
               interrupted by the user’s keyboard, memory depletion, or power loss.
                  Python can handle integers with effectively unlimited precision, which means that there is not a limit on how big
                  the value for generated can be, unlike languages such as Java and C . What this means is that generated can exceed
                  the conventional limits on integers, so that the main loop in sample_model can
                  indeed run indefinitely. (The parallels with Stanislaw Lem and Trurl’s
               machines write themselves.)
            
               Snippet of generate_unconditional_samples.py
               
               A lengthy snippet of code
            
            Nevertheless, the irony of zero as a limit for infinite generation has the effect of
               drawing our attention to the crux of the matter: the point at which human action
               affects — or fails to affect — machine behavior. In this particular instance, the
               interaction with GPT-2 is not only limited but essentially one sided; in technically
               imprecise terms, it amounts to start the machine and let it run. It might even
               be conceived as a contemporary iteration of the Hello,
                  World! program, with the text passed onto the print function generated by
               another function (GPT-2) rather than a human. It is perhaps an obvious point but one
               that bears repeating: interactions between humans and machine learning systems cannot
               and should not take this form.
            If restricted human action is suggested by the syntax of the file name, generate
                  unconditional, then interactive unconditional might seem in turn to
               promise a more substantive mode of engagement than mere behavior initiation. Indeed,
               interactive_unconditional_samples.py does make it possible for users to
                  interact and have a degree of influence over GPT-2’s predictions, in that
               several lines of this code allow users to input a phrase or sentence of their
               choosing for the model to complete. But here too action is limited, in this instance
               to the production of single-use seed text: thus, type the quick brown fox and
               then wait for the output. GPT-2 will attempt to follow from the prompt and complete
               the sentence as many times as specified, but each iteration is distinct in that the
               user needs to prompt the model with more seed text and the model will not take prior
               input into account when generating further text. While the call-and-response
               structure of an interaction, for example, might seem to suggest a balance of forces,
               and even a kind of mutuality between human and machine, the process is better thought
               of in terms of input-output, with all its connotations of routinized, mechanized,
               even roboticized action. The high quality of ChatGPT’s output, and particularly
                  its ability to remember prior exchanges, seems once again to have invoked the
                  specter of machinic liveness, but the structure of the input-output process with
                  GPT-3.5 is of course no different from GPT-2. It is in other words
               cooperative writing only in the rudimentary sense that there are at least two actants
               generating words in sequence.
            We can now shift our attention to the degree with which
               generate_unconditional_samples.py and interactive_conditional_samples.py transform
               the language model’s numerical output and remark on their equally basic operation.
               (For economy, we restrict our attention to generate_unconditional_samples.py, as the
               analysis applies to both.) After querying the model and receiving the results,
               generate_unconditional_samples saves the output to a variable succinctly named
                  out on line 71. At this point, the data contained in out would be
               meaningless to readers because it is still numerical; that is, each individual token
               in the output string is still encoded as numbers. In order to transform the data to
               readable text, it must then be passed to a decoder on line 74, at which point the
               decoding mechanism housed within encoder.py looks up a dictionary entry to map the
               numerical tokens back to their textual counterparts (Figure 7). Although the
               translational work here is non-trivial — readers cannot otherwise parse GPT-2’s
               output — the operation itself is basic and limited to dictionary queries. It is
               though of course possible to use ADLC to perform more complex transformations after
               the decoding stage to more dramatically alter GPT-2’s output, as we shall outline. 
            
               Representative entries in the dictionary used for encoding and decoding. After
                  the special unicode token, \u0120, the words are followed by their
                  numerical ID.
               
               several lines of code
            
            This deep dive into GPT-2’s GitHub repository and analysis of its ADLC has thus far
               not specified the which and the when — all-important
               delimiters for a language model that came to fame in part because of its staged
               release . We have hinted at the reconstruction
               required to look back and analyze the experience of what it was like to interact with
               GPT-2 in 2019 and can now be more explicit about the archaeological work one has to
               do in order to analyze the model in the present. What we have studied thus far is an
               almost-exact snapshot of the ADLC as it appeared in the first release in 2019, a
               picture that represents OpenAI’s initial vision and its open invitation to developers
               to explore the limits of GPT-2’s behavior. The intervening years have seen a number
               of changes, not only to GPT-2 but also to its dependencies. Tensorflow, for example,
               has evolved to such an extent that much of the code of GPT-2 will not work unless
               updated to align with Tensorflow’s new protocols. Even more important to the running
               of the original GPT-2 model are the weights, which must be downloaded via
               download_model.py in order for the model to execute. Thus, one could envision a
               future CCS scholar, or even ordinary user, attempting to read GPT-2 without the
               weights and finding the analytical exercise to be radically limited, akin to
               excavating a machine without an energy source from the graveyard of dead
                     media.
            With an analysis of interactive_conditional_samples.py, we seem to have come to a
               fork in the road of developer engagements with GPT-2’s source code. We have mapped
               its structure and identified the prescribed interfaces through which the model
               interacts with the world, observing the relatively basic means by which GPT-2’s ADLC
               transforms the raw output and constructs the interaction medium. The next step takes
               us outside the repository so we may consider how the circulation of GPT-2’s source
               code generated new instances of ADLC that in turn morphed into new interfaces for
               interaction and new forms of management, regulation, and control. 
         

            3. Applications of GPT-2
            GPT-2 can be described in basic terms as a computational procedure that takes a
               vectorized token (a textual unit) as input and outputs a corresponding vector of
               token probabilities. Extensive user engagement, however, has transformed the language
               model into an interactive object whose function extends well beyond the production of
               deep learning prediction. For this issue of interaction, we find helpful
                  Florian Cramer’s articulation of software as a cultural
                     practice made up of (a) algorithms, (b) possibly, but not necessarily in
                     conjunction with imaginary or actual machines, (c) human interaction in a broad
                     sense of any cultural appropriation and use, and (d) speculative
                     imagination
                  . We also find helpful the genealogical
                  account of computer interaction in  as well as the
                  account of a paradigm shift from algorithms to interactive systems in . The story of the staged release of GPT-2 is at
               this point perhaps well known: it proceeds from the debut of the partial model (117m
               parameters) in February 2019, its fanfare fueled both by the fantastic tale of Ovid’s
               unicorn as well as the suggestion that it performed too well and thus needed to be
               guarded against malicious use through the withholding of the full 1.5b parameter
               model . Because the release was open source and the
               technological barrier for interaction relatively low, the announcement of GPT-2 as a
                  better model was a siren song that lured users of all capacities into a
               range of experiments to test its capacities and the code went into widespread
               circulation. The release then was a textbook instance of a computational object
               moving from the clean room of the algorithm to the
                  wild, tainted and unpredictable space of dynamic and shared
                  environment
               . Marino narrates such a trajectory in
               related terms, writing of his realization that he needed to take
                  code out of the black box and explore the way its complex and unique sign systems
                  make meaning as it circulates through varied contexts
               . In the case of GPT-2, much of the enthusiasm
               driving circulation derived from experiments with fine-tuning, the process of editing
               GPT-2’s internal weights by training it on specific texts so that it can better
               emulate them. Fine-tuning alters the CDLC and might be thought as a form of technical
               speculation (e.g. altering the parameters and the training data). Although we will
               not elaborate on how fine-tuning affects the model, as we shall see shortly, the
               process plays an important role in enabling This Word Does Not
                  Exist to generate fictitious dictionary entries. Our concern will be a
               more expressive and conceptual form of speculation, in the guise of transforming ADLC
               and developing different interfaces that allow for a modicum of control over GPT-2. 
            Perhaps the most organic extensions of the form of interaction made possible by
               interactive_conditional_samples.py are projects that configure GPT-2 as a writing
               assistant. Interactive writing platforms such as Write With
                  Transformer situate GPT-2 in an auxiliary role as a kind of editor,
               queueing up the model to autocomplete the user’s input text, and thus reaffirm a
               hierarchy of labor (it is after all the user who writes with GPT-2). TabNine,
               which hooks into conventional code editors like Visual Studios Code, is particularly
               notable in this regard in that GPT-2 is pulled into an authoring environment in which
               the user can direct its operations, as opposed to writing with GPT-2 within its
               source code. While certainly functional, these examples are precisely and even only
               that: although there is a certain degree of fine-tuning that takes place to
                  shape GPT-2’s output, the language model’s output is precisely replicated
               for the user without any addition modifications that might otherwise improve its
               quality (which we have already seen with generate_unconditional_samples.py and
               interactive_conditional_samples.py). For more imaginative work with ADLC that treats
               GPT-2’s output not as plain text but as poetic material, and interaction not as a
               basic chatbot session but as something more like an expansive Dungeons & Dragons session, we turn to AI
                  Dungeon and This Word Does Not Exist, two of
               many implementations that demonstrate the transformative work of developers outside
               of OpenAI and attest to the vibrancy and collaborative spirit of the NLP community
               writ large. 
            Originating in a college hackathon project, AI Dungeon
               is built on a version of the GPT-2 model fine-tuned on a corpus of
               choose-your-own-adventure stories. While we have elsewhere elaborated on the game’s
               provision of a framework for evaluating language models and its status as a
               paradigmatic instance of citizen NLP, for this analysis we wish to highlight
               the political and aesthetic potential of the commands available on the game’s
               interface as they are articulated by ADLC .
               Particularly when viewed in relation to the modes of interaction we have here been
               charting, game commands like remember,
               revert, and alter serve as potent examples of true collaboration
               between human users and deep learning models. To start, we return to the GitHub
               repository for an earlier version of AI Dungeon, in
               order to highlight the ADLC responsible for the game interface . Within the repository, there is a copy of the GPT-2 model
               in the generator folder, which also contains CTRL, another language model with which
               the game was experimenting. The GPT-2 in this generator folder is almost a mirror
               copy of the one in the original GPT-2 repository, apart for the notable absence of
               the aforementioned ADLC modules — generate_unconditional and interactive_conditional
               — which have here been replaced by play.py, a more expressive form of ADLC structured
               as a text adventure game that feeds user inputs to a language model for the response. 
            play.py contains code that prints out a splash image of the game’s title and
               sets up the archetypical > delimiter awaiting user input. The module
               initiates an iterative gameplay loop whereby the underlying language model narrates a
               story, awaits for user input in the linguistic form of actions or game commands,
               processes the input, and then returns the next portion of the story. The
               call-and-response loop with GPT-2 is familiar, but with subtle differences: play.py
               calls GPT-2 via two wrappers that extend the language model’s functionality on lines
               175 and 176. Called on line 175, GPT2Generator essentially mimics
               generate_unconditional_samples.py or interactive_conditional_samples.py by processing
               the user input and querying the underlying language model. However, GPT2Generator
               extends the language model’s functionality by doing some post-processing work such as
               removing trailing sentences, converting the output into the second person, correcting
               punctuation (at line 85 in gpt2_generator.py, it moves periods outside quotation
               marks), and filtering so-termed bad words. What GPT2Generator does then is somewhat
               inexactly shape the model’s output to bring it more in line with contemporary
               linguistic protocols and the generic conventions of a text adventure game. The second
               wrapper, StoryManager, is built on top of GPT2Generator and does the work that its
               name suggests: past events generated by GPT-2 and the player’s actions are strung
               together and maintained in memory, constituting a story.
            While work that play.py does to transform or translate the raw output from GPT-2 into
               the form of a text adventure game is fundamental, we find even more compelling the
               use of ADLC to extend the underlying language model’s functionality and radically
               reimagine our interaction with it. Of particular note are those mechanics that, true
               to the form of a game, prompt incremental action and in so doing emphasize
               collaboration and revision. Remember, for example, is an experimental command
               allowing players to embed pieces of information that are constantly fed into GPT-2 at
               each step of the prediction and thus emulate a loose memory for the AI
               narrator. Revert functions as a kind of rewind and allows players to return to
               any step in the preceding narrative. Alter, perhaps the most dramatic of the
               three, allows for a complete edit of the AI’s predictions at each step, offering
               players the remarkable ability to address and fix predictions, as opposed to
               prompting the model to produce a new prediction from scratch, as if no lessons had
               been learned. While these commands all give some indication of the expressive
               capacity of next-gen text generators and advance the development of different modes
               of human-AI interaction, what is especially germane to our discussion are the
               processes and conditions that made them possible in the first place. 
            Notably, such creative work is enabled by very basic programming constructs.
               Conditional statements on lines 233 to line 320 in play.py determine what command the
               user wants to take (e.g. elif command == revert). Within these
               conditional statements, rudimentary operations are creatively exploited to mimic
               advanced behaviors; for example, reverting a game step is as simple as decrementing
               an index within the story manager’s memory. Other complex mechanics like alter
               might be enabled by more complex functions, but what we highlight here is the
               relatively low bar for engagement with language models and deep learning application
               development. In the case of AI Dungeon, almost all of
               the extra behaviors for the game stem from commands coded in play.py, an instance of
               ADLC in the wild
                and the means by which developers of all abilities,
               including those who are not specialists in machine learning, can tinker with GPT-2,
               manipulate its outputs, and more broadly operationalize the model so that it serves
               as a medium for creative production. Python creator Guido van Rossum states in
                  an interview that the programming language was implemented in a way that
                  emphasizes interactivity and that it was based on ABC, which was intended to be a programming language that could be taught to
                     intelligent computer users who were not computer programmers or software
                     developers in any sense
                  . Deep learning’s commitment to Python thus had the
                  effect of expanding access to a wide population of programmers. Coding in such an
                  easily-accessible and common language (overshadowed only by JavaScript and
                  HTML/CCS) and opening the source code (model.py) to be callable implicitly invites
                  other Python users to interact and experiment with your model.  Improving
               GPT-2, or any deep learning model, certainly depends on the modification of model
               architecture and the development of further training data, but the work done with
               play.py suggests that ADLC is a no less meaningful means by which to direct the
               model’s functioning — all the more so because it is a technique and tool available to
               ordinary users.
            Borrowing its title from the notorious deep fake application, This Person Does Not Exist, This Word Does Not
                  Exist (TWDNE) serves as a further example of the creative capacities of
               ADLC, as well as, not coincidentally, the discursive framing of GPT-2 as dangerous
               . Generating a faux lexicography requires two steps:
               conditioning (fine-tuning) the model and post-processing the output. Conditioning
               starts with urban_dictionary_scraper.py, which, as its name suggests, scrapes Urban
               Dictionary and formats the information into a data structure that corresponds to a
               dictionary entry . The function _parse_definition_div then
               scrapes the site using the common method of searching for HTML elements corresponding
               to the specified information — in this instance, finding the location of the word’s
               definition and then looking for HTML elements with an attribute appropriately named
                  meaning. Once all the relevant information is extracted, it is inserted
               into a data structure that organizes the information for final compilation into a
               fine-tuning dataset (Figure 8). 
            
               The data structure that constitutes a dictionary entry
               
               A code snippet
            
            After the relevant dictionary entries are scraped, they are collated and formatted in
               train.py into a training dataset used to fine-tune GPT-2. Of note in this process is
               the clever communication protocol that facilitates information extraction down the
               line. On line 903 in train.py, special tokens (<|bod|>, <|pos|>,
               <|bd|>, <|be|>, <|pad|>) are inserted and divide the training
               instances (i.e. a word and relevant information like its definition) into
               informational chunks. In this way, GPT-2 is conditioned to generate strings of text
               that have the embedded structure of a dictionary entry, with a word, part of speech,
               definition, and exemplary usage. 
            The embedded structure is evident in the example of the custom generation of the
               fictitious word, cochiadiography, which begins with word_generator.py to
               gather user input and initialize parameters, and then datasets.py to call on GPT-2
               for text generation on line 567 (GPT-2 is here also enclosed in a wrapper class that
               extends its functionality): 
            <|bod|>cochiadiography<|pos|>noun<|bd|>art and literature relating
               to these matters.<|be|>students found their fair share of mistakes in the
               present work, with students undertaking
               someCochiadiography<|eod|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|><|pad|>
            In this sample, we see that the relevant information is cleverly separated by
               artificial delimiters designed by the programmer. After the raw output is generated,
               a pattern matching process starting on line 586 of datasets.py further decodes the
               output. (Note that this human-readable string implies that a decoding step that was
               highlighted in generate_unconditional_samples.py has already taken place.) On this
               line, the output is matched against a predefined pattern to identify the
               aforementioned special tokens that articulate the information in a dictionary entry,
               as well as information nestled between the tokens (with this specification, the
                  <|pad|> token will be regarded as meaningless and discarded). Next,
               another pattern matching function (group) parses the successful string to
               extract the different pieces of information and save them to separate variables. At
               this point, other post-processing measures akin to those used by AI Dungeon are in play, notably among them the filters that catch and
               remove objectionable content. 
            Removing profanity from AI Dungeon is a basic operation
               by no means particular to deep learning: unless censorship is toggled off,
               output from GPT-2 is passed to the aptly named remove_profanity function, which
               relies on an external module, also aptly named ProfanityFilter, to replace words appearing on a custom censor list with
               strings of the * character. That there is something inherently subjective and
               even arbitrary about a list of 114 profane words should be evident from the start but
               further evinced by the presence of goddamned; that there is something blunt
               about the operation is evinced by the use of the Python re (regular
               expression) for basic find-and-replace. More suggestive because more intricate is
               TWDNE’s screening for hate speech with a custom blacklist of some 5,763,399 words and
               phrases that begins as follows when a set of blacklisted words is loaded (Figure 9): 
            
               TWDNE’s blacklist
               
               A long list of words and symbols with some spacing errors between
                  words
            
            What garbage conceptual poetry is this, a reader might ask, and they would not be
               wrong to wonder at the sourcing and means by which such a text file would be
               generated. The atrocities grossly alluded to at the outset (killing and scalping) are clear enough, and reference to Levin Tilmon
               writing to Abraham Lincoln in 1861 about the composition of the Union forces might
               lead one to surmise that the filter flags all content related to the U.S. Civil War,
               but what exactly happened in Malta in February 1960, and would this determination
               necessitate a deep dive into the fevered swamps of 4chan’s /pol/ board, or at least a
               passing familiarity with contemporary conspiracy theory?TWDNE’s blacklist is
                  used not only to filter output but also to evaluate the creativity of the same:
                  creative words: 1 – (num_blacklisted / max(num_succeeded_match, 1)) 
                  nonconforming: num_failed_match / num_generated And what to do with
                  more complex, also a delimited token, much less
                  and guards? What taboo subjects or language do these
               expressions index and why should they be subject to content moderation? Both the
               content and the form of the .txt file, with all of the liberties taken therein with
               punctuation and spelling, suggest that the list results from either model training or
               finetuning, with and guards perhaps appearing, who
               knows, in an Urban Dictionary entry that also mentions the Holocaust (and indeed the
               paradigmatic logic of machine learning — correlationism — is here very much on
               display). To use the Saussurean framework, we might note then that ADLC not only
               resituates numerical data within the realm of langue
               (a syntactical, rules-based conception of language), as we have seen with the
               decoding mechanism in generate_unconditional_samples.py, but in the case of bad
                  word filters, it also manifestly pulls that output into the realm of parole (gesturing toward, if not always adhering to,
               social conventions in its treating of certain words and concepts as taboo). 
            Regardless of the precise mode of composition of the blacklist used by the faux
               lexicographic application, its arbitrariness is evinced by our discovery of the word,
                  bastardistic (Figure 10). Like cochiadiography,
               bastardistic began as a string generated by the language model. To borrow
               terms from TWDNE’s template, that string was then invented,
                  defined and used as a word — more properly, translated into a word — by
               datasets.py and not filtered by the blacklist, a process that opens up another
               meaning of the project’s title. It is not simply that bastardistic is a
               representative word that does not exist, but that the application is not actually
               outputting words; what is at work, in other words, is not language generation, but
               rather function returns. Good output, by whatever metric, might summon the fantasy of
               model sentience, but this is easily countered by an interface such as TWDNE, which
               engineers the output in a manner that exposes GPT-2 as a mere function returning four
               pieces of structured lexicographic data. 
            
               Screen capture from TWDNE
               
               Definition of the fake word bastardistic
            
            Part of OpenAI’s stated rationale for the withholding of the full model of GPT-2 in
               February 2019, we recall, was concern about prospective misuse, which would include
               not only disinformation but also hate speech . There was
               then and is now work being done at the level of training data and the model (CLDC) to
               guard against the emergence of another Microsoft Tay, but it is nonetheless left to
               developers to determine the acceptable parameters of their applications and
               implementations of GPT-2. Pattern matching, regular expressions, and filtering — all
               examples of ADLC performing ordinary functions in relation to deep learning objects —
               are some of the means toward this end. The need for such ad hoc techniques at all
               stages of the communication pipeline, however, serves as a reminder that the wild
               expressivity of NLG can take both negative and affirmative form — hence the discourse
               on risk and responsibility. Whereas generate_unconditional_samples.py in the GPT-2
               source code functions with something like complete openness, then, it falls to the
               ADLC in AI Dungeon and This Word
                  Does Not Exist to manage and regulate the model’s output.
         

            4. Conclusion
            Through the developmental arc extending from generate_unconditional_samples.py to
                  AI Dungeon and This Word Does
                  Not Exist, we have traced a process of continual modification and
               refinement of GPT-2’s behavior through distributed engagement, the effect of which
               has been to bring the model into true cooperative relation. Our analysis of GPT-2’s
               code has shown that deep learning’s potential for interactivity is embedded within
               the open-source Python kernel that made widely available the tools for building
               interfaces that structure user engagement. The open source code also made it possible
               for developers to identify and then address unacceptable or otherwise faulty behavior
               — exercises that arguably contribute to a sense of community and collective
               responsibility. While the source code defining the limits of interaction was written
               by OpenAI, then, the whole of the code apparatus that we now refer to as GPT-2 was authored by a wide range of developers, from
               amateurs to academics and professional programmers.EuletherAI’s open-source
                     GPT-J is particularly noteworthy
                  here, not only as a model for responsible AI research but also as an impressive
                     outsider appropriation of the model. At some level, the
               centralization of AI research cannot be contested, not least because of the massive
               quantities of data available to, because extracted by, companies such as Google,
               Facebook, Amazon, and OpenAI. But from a different angle the research environment
               seems far more distributed, with (often) self-trained individuals and institutional
               actors alike working to refine the behavior of deep learning models. 
            Future CCS work with language models can continue work with GPT-2 as well as other
               open-source models such as the permutations of GPT and BERT, BLOOM, CLIP, and
                  DALL-E.While our analysis holds for GPT-2’s ADLC, further research is
                  required in order to determine whether it applies to other domains such as
                  computer vision and generative adversarial networks (GANs). It can also
               lend its voice to the conversation about what can and cannot be done with GPT-3’s API
               and to the request to make the model more easily callable by either external software
               or non-software products. If the statistical and mathematical foundations of deep
               learning have meant that qualitative research has almost necessarily had recourse to
               abstraction, an insistence on code as the object of analysis may advance and sustain
               humanistic engagement in that textual scholars can meaningfully contribute to the
               development of analytical frameworks that in turn inform actual research practices.
                  Doing things with deep learning code, then, may very well mean helping to
               produce another possible future for language models, one that is more open and more
               available to both creative engagement and critical scrutiny.
         
