Title:  Rich Veins of Ore: A Review of Gabe Ignatow and Rada
               Mihalcea’s 
Volume:  017
Issue:  4
Date:  15 December 2023
Abstract:  
            
            An Introduction to Text Mining: Research Design, Data
                  Collection, and Analysis by Gabe Ignatow and Rada Mihalcea is most
               effective in balancing clear explanations of analytical techniques with sufficient
               technical details to engage a cross-disciplinary audience. Its process-oriented
               approach can broaden interest and build greater proficiency in applied
               text-mining.
         
Full Body Text: 
In An Introduction to Text Mining: Research Design, Data
               Collection, and Analysis, Ignatow and Mihalcea bring together their distinct
            areas of expertise to produce a collection of lightly-coupled chapters on digital
            approaches to text in the social sciences. The collaboration of Ignatow, a sociologist
            at the University of North Texas, and Mihalcea, a computer scientist at the University
            of Michigan, is a choice example of the interdisciplinary trends that are foundational
            to the advancement of the digital humanities and their work addresses the growing need
            for collaboratively written, practical texts for social sciences and humanities
            research. In particular, their work is intended to inform the research processes of
            undergraduate or early graduate students who want to do research
               using online tools and data sets
            . Although, in practice, the tools and
            datasets to which they are referring are textually-based, the work engages with more
            widely relevant topics that are applicable to all forms of data, such as ethics, project
            design, and research dissemination. 
The book’s chapters are succinctly written and, at a typical length of ten to twenty
            pages, they are easily digestible as standalone readings or supplementary course
            assignments. Enhancing its purpose as a tool for students, each chapter begins with a
            set of learning objectives and concludes with a summary, key terms, highlights of main
            ideas, and questions for review and discussion. Occasionally, these are supplemented by
            lists of further readings and the text is interspersed with Spotlight on the Research info boxes, which summarize a relevant piece of
            published scholarship. 
The structure of the work (and much of the content) takes inspiration from the authors’
            earlier publication, Text Mining: A Guidebook for the Social
               Sciences
            . To address their intended student audience, the
            authors nicely organize the text into a six-part structure that parallels the research
            process. Beginning with the first four chapters, which constitute Part I: Foundations, the authors establish an engaging but appropriately
            academic tone, and they do not assume prior knowledge of research projects or text
            analysis. Although, in Chapter 1, they rather quickly dive into theoretical approaches
            where greater exposition on the applications of text analysis and its research value may
            have been more appropriate , the early
            emphasis on theory is notable, since it is all too easy to apply digital methods
            haphazardly. Their theoretical foundation is further solidified in Chapter 4 with the
            discussion of philosophical bases for text analysis, such as constructionism and
            critical realism , and an overview
            about drawing appropriate inferences from data . Perhaps most vital for students who may be new to digital research,
            Chapter 3 is wholly devoted to ethics and it presents essential, high-level takeaways on
            privacy, informed consent, and the role of the institutional review board in
            research.
In Part II: Research Design and Basic Tools (Chapter 5 and
            6), the authors attempt to shepherd the reader from foundational theory and concepts
            into the more practical realm. The decision-making process that goes into research
            design and issues of data gathering are reviewed in Chapter 5  and the authors, then, cover data
            collection using web scraping Chapter 6. One thorny aspect of the text shows through in
            this section: namely, the inclusion of what I would argue are tangential details and
            overly specific explanations. While this may be the result of the authors wrestling with
            their need to address a complex and inter-disciplinary audience, it can divert attention
            from the main purpose of the work. For example, while the discussion of qualitative,
            quantitative, and mixed-methods research is relevant , delving into sampling methods, such
            as stratified and snowball sampling ,
            feels excessive. Additionally, the devotion of an entire chapter to one method for data
            collection, rather than more broadly addressing best practices for data acquisition and
            organization, is superfluous. Certainly, web scraping is and will remain important, but
            it is not the only or even arguably the primary method for new researchers to acquire
            textual data. This chapter, too, contains some oddities that perhaps further show a
            struggle with establishing the needs of their audience. For example, the chapter begins
            by casually mentioning programming environments like Python or
               R
             before devoting a page to explaining
            what the web is . Unfortunately, on the whole, the section feels like a missed opportunity
            to instill solid data collection and organization practices in new researchers. In a
            pedagogical setting, this section should be supplemented with more thorough works on
            data management best practices (e.g. ; ). 
Part III: Text Mining Fundamentals (Chapters 7-9) is quite
            distinct from its precursor. Here, the authors constructively lay out the core resources
            and processes of text analysis, and within the course of my own work, this is the
            section to which I most frequently refer students and researchers who are new to text
            analysis. The coverage of lexical resources in Chapter 7 is pragmatic; although
            constantly expanding, the major resources , such as LIWC (Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count) and WordNet, likely
            to remain important for some time are mentioned and indicate rich ores of material for
            text mining. The summaries of each resource are accompanied by effective illustrations
            and tables, which make clear to the reader each resource’s composition and merit.
            Chapter 8’s coverage of text processing is detailed, but still approachable for a
            student. It is, also, here that one first glimpses some of the practical capabilities of
            text analysis, such as frequency counts, part-of-speech tagging, and named entity
            recognition . Those are likely to
            inspire the reader to begin considering more deeply the applications of text analysis
            within their own research projects. 
The authors do well capitalizing on Chapter 8’s productiveness and invigorating the
            reader to pursue deeper research applications in Parts IV and V, which respectively
            cover Text Analysis Methods from the Humanities and Social
               Sciences (Chapters 10-12) and Text Mining Methods from
               Computer Science (Chapters 13-16). The parts scale up from the lexical unit
            and cover conceptually higher techniques such as qualitative and mixed-methods narrative
            analysis , Naive Bayes text
            classification , and topic modeling
            with latent Dirichlet allocation and latent semantic analysis . They are described well, including
            clear examples of when and how to use each that are accompanied by ample in-text
            citations. The text truly hits its stride in these two parts and the authors balance
            clear explanations with sufficient technical details that remain appropriate for a
            cross-disciplinary audience. For readers less interested in social sciences theory and
            basic research practices, and more ready to dig into the meat of text analysis, Parts
            III to V can be read on their own.
The work concludes with a single chapter, Writing and Reporting
               Your Research, that constitutes Part VI. Although the topic of publication
            and dissemination is an appropriate coda for the structure of the work, which again
            parallels the research process, the chapter feels somewhat cursory and forced.
            Approximately seven of the chapter’s seventeen pages are devoted to a list of
            undergraduate and social sciences journals , of which some are now defunct (e.g. Colorado State’s Journal of Undergraduate Research and Scholarly Excellence) and
            others appear to have ceased publication long before this work was released (e.g. Lethbridge Undergraduate Research Journal). The lack of
            sufficient in-text citations, moreover, sets this chapter apart from others,
            particularly as the citation and review of exemplary undergraduate research papers would
            have been welcomed. As earlier suggested for Part II on data management, adding
            domain-specific examples of model publications or more general works on disseminating
            digital research (e.g. ; ; ) would
            strengthen the underlying message.
Despite some problematic areas, Ignatow and Mihalcea’s An
               Introduction to Text Mining: Research Design, Data Collection, and Analysis,
            remains an excellent resource for students and researchers new to text analysis. The
            text is punctuated by especially rich and dense veins of technical ore that a reader can
            readily extract and refine for their own research areas. On its own, an introductory
            course could easily be structured around the text and any scholar in the humanities or
            social sciences interested in breaking into the world of digital scholarship would be
            well rewarded by reading sections of this book. It is worth concluding that the authors
            have done an exemplary job in taking a process-oriented approach, which emphasizes
            techniques, theories, and applications without the baggage of relying on a single
            toolset. The effect is practical content that will last in an otherwise ephemeral world
            of digital tools.
