Title:  A Keyword
					Analysis of 
Volume:  017
Issue:  1
Date:  3 February 2023
Abstract:  
				
				In not only classrooms but also digital spaces, conceptual keywords are rich tools for scholarship, teaching, and research. This article analyzes climate change as a keyword in contemporary literary studies to assess how the keyword's occurence in the MLA International Bibliography frames metadata engagement. Encouraging access to scholarship through effective keyword selection enables finding, citing, and responding to important scholarship. Among other fields, contemporary literary studies and the digital humanities will benefit from shared terms of engagement to encourage precision with terms in a variety of contexts. Drawing on bibliometric analysis tools, I analyze indexed citations from four academic journals: ISLE: Interdisciplinary Studies in Literature and Environment; Contemporary Literature; MFS Modern Fiction Studies; and PMLA: Publications of the Modern Language Association. Working with ISLE as a reference case and the latter three as test cases, I find that the occurence of climate change as a keyword is less than that of a different, broader keyword: enviromental crisis. The disjunction in occurence rates between these two terms provides a keyword problematic that requires further review. For each corpus, I discuss the ramifications of this keyword problematic by highlighting significant intersections and disconnections. To conclude, I reflect on the benefits of standardized indexing practices for contemporary literary studies, the digital humanities, and emergent fields such as the digital environmental humanities.
			
Full Body Text: 

			
			 The Marxist scholar and critic Raymond Williams was one of the first to suggest
				the importance of keywords for literary studies. Originally published in 1976,
				Williams’s book Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and
					Society challenges conceptions of everyday terms through historical
				analysis. Specifically, Williams’s keywords demonstrate how shared discourse
				changes over time. As Williams notes, When we come to say ‘we just don’t speak
				the same language’ we mean something more general: that we have different
				immediate values or different kinds of valuation, or that we are aware, often
				intangibly, of different formations and distributions of energy and interest . Studying conceptual keywords in this view not only
				enables insights into semantic shifts but also reveals how historically
				contingent conditions embed themselves within such shifts. As such, composing
				keyword entries revealed to Williams that words which seem to have been there
				for centuries, with continuous general meanings, have come in fact to express
				radically different or radically variable, yet sometimes hardly noticed,
				meanings and implications of meaning . These insights have since
				generated a rich tradition of keyword analysis projects in the humanities,
				including but not limited to select critical theory books, the Living Lexicon
				series from the journal Environmental Humanities, as well
				as the Keywords series from New York University Press,
				which includes entries on disability, gender and sexuality, and environmental
				studies. 
			 Since Williams, scholars have relied on keywords in reading, writing, and
				teaching. For many, a different kind of keyword engagement influences
				research methods. Keyword indexing in databases such as the Modern Language
				Association (MLA) International Bibliography facilitates access to published
				scholarship’s metadata. Selecting effective keywords on such databases enables
				the act of finding, citing, and responding to scholarship. Scholars interested
				in climate change, for instance, search databases for articles that effectively
				deal with the topic’s complexity, which, as Andrew Ross [2016] notes, connects
				to historical ramifications for scientific knowledge and planetary, geopolitical
				conflict . However, it is important to note for not only contemporary
				literary studies but also the digital humanities that disjunctions in database
				indexing impede digital access to scholarship. In this article, I explore how
				select academic journals from contemporary literary studies exemplify this
				disjunction through the occurrence of climate change as a keyword. Applying
				the VOSviewer bibliometric analysis tool, I analyze thousands of unique
				citations in four academic journals representative of work in contemporary
				literary studies that scholars in the field consider trendsetters. Large
				datasets of bibliographic data allow us to survey scholarship through their
				indexed citations and authorial networks     . Digital bibliometric analyses
				therefore enable scaled-up analyses of how keywords impact precise framing of
				and engagement with indexed research. 
			 The field of contemporary literary studies presents a valuable case study in how
				we categorize humanistic scholarship about climate change and related
				environmental issues because its scholarship reviews direct representations of
				climate change. Owing to established fields such as ecocriticism, the discipline
				enjoys many conferences, journal articles, and monographs dedicated to climate
				change    , and
				scholarship will only proliferate in the coming years. Digital humanists will
				thus benefit from looking at the use of keywords in contemporary literary
				studies. The field reflects ongoing some of the more significant developments in
				humanities scholarship on myriad environmental issues, including but not limited
				to climate change. Deriving insights from a bibliometric analysis of
				contemporary literary studies will, in turn, suggest new possibilities for
				indexing scholarship that encourage engagement and access. While I go into more
				detail about the results below, this project’s central purpose is to identify
				how climate change occurs as an object of scholarly inquiry in the humanities
				through its use as a keyword in contemporary literary studies. 

			Corpus and Methods
			The following sections encompass a bibliometric analysis of four journals from
				contemporary literary studies: ISLE: Interdisciplinary Studies
					in Literature and Environment (ISLE); Contemporary Literature (CL); MFS Modern Fiction Studies (MFS);
				and PMLA: Publications of the Modern Language Association
					(PMLA). I analyze the ISLE
				corpus as a reference case for the occurrence of climate change as a
				keyword in a journal explicitly interested in environmental issues. With this
				corpus as a basis, I compare the other three corpora as benchmarks of
				contemporary literary studies scholarship. In selecting journals for analysis, I
				gathered indexed citations from journals with approximately 500-750 results in
				the MLA International Bibliography. These results derive from filtering out
				non-English language results and citations that occur prior to 2000. The ISLE corpus counts 665 unique citations; the CL corpus counts 620; the MFS
				corpus counts 763; and the PMLA corpus counts 1,964.
				Though I considered journals such as Environmental Humanities
				and Resilience: A Journal of Environmental
					Humanities as supplemental reference cases to ISLE, they were excluded because their indexed citation counts in the
				MLA International Bibliography were less than 500 at the time of data collection. 
			Although the periodization of contemporary literature is highly contested
				, my scope includes literature published from 1985 to
				the present while limiting scholarship on said literature from 2000 to early
				2022. I adopt this timeline because I am most interested in scholarship that
				addresses recent representations of climate change that benefit from engagement
				(or lack thereof) with the past three decades of climate science. At the same
				time, I acknowledge that these journals — besides ISLE — do
				not tally significant counts of climate change as a keyword because the topic
				was likely peripheral to their interests up until the last decade. However, I
				find them valuable test cases because they have since published on the topic
				and, thus, can be analyzed as a corpus with keyword connections that either do
				or do not reflect the topic’s many connections. With these variables in mind, I
				assembled each journal’s corpus, limiting their indexed citations in the MLA
				International Bibliography to English-language citations from 2000 to the
				present.  This corpus reflects the reviewed journal’s index counts as of
					January 24, 2022; it therefore does not include citations indexed after
					data gathering. The corpus is available for review on request. I
				then exported the citations as research information system files to process with
				VOSviewer, a bibliometrics tool with modularity algorithms for visualizing
				author networks and keyword occurrence clusters . I
				initially isolated keywords that occur at least ten times in the top fifty
				keywords across the run of journal articles and book reviews, removing keywords
				that convey period duration or generalist categories.  For each journal’s
					corpus, I removed select keywords that disproportionately impacted the
					visualizations. While select keywords do not occur in each corpus (unlike
						CL and MFS, PMLA’s scope extends its range to medieval literary
					studies, which leads to keywords such as 1500-1599 and 1600-1699), the
					listed keywords reappear frequently enough across corpora to justify
					exclusion: 400-1499, 1100-middle English, 1500-1599, 1600-1699,
					1700-1799, 1800-1899, 1900-1999, 2000-2009, english language
					literature, fiction, prose, short story, and film.  I began
				with 10 keyword occurrences because that number suggests a keyword’s relative
				frequency in a corpus of at least 500 citations. If a climate change cluster
				did not emerge at ten keywords, I decreased the occurrence count to five and, if
				necessary, one keyword to find the climate change keyword cluster. I
				simultaneously increased the top count in permutations of 50, 100, and 1,000,
				while decreasing the occurrence count (if a cluster does not emerge in the top
				fifty, it will emerge at subsequent scales). I followed these steps to
				determine the relative significance of climate change as a keyword in each
				reviewed corpus. 
			While this article derives inspiration for bibliometric analyses elsewhere in
				literary studies , it also follows bibliometric
				analyses in applied environmental sciences that propose new avenues for research
				  . Reconciling differences between these projects will inform framings
				of climate change in digital humanities research and points to the utility of
				digital interventions in the environmental humanities. Survey approaches of
				contemporary literary studies, ecocriticism, and the environment humanities
				precede this project, as we see in select articles from Ursula K. Heise [2006a]
				[2006b] [2008] [2013]. But because digital humanities tools can analyze
				thousands of citations in databases, scaled-up bibliometric analyses can determine common terms of engagement between otherwise
				disconnected disciplines. As such, I focus on climate change as a keyword
				because keywords such as climate malaise, climate fatigue, and climate
				perturbation are not commonly recognized. The project also must rely on the
				keywords provided by the indexers of the MLA International Bibliography:
				climate change is the keyword because it is what appears on the database. I
				follow this parameter because climate change is a discursive
				mainstay, a keyword in the truest sense of Williams’s work. For example, a brief
				search for publications with Environment in the Scopus database reveals the
				predominance of climate change as a keyword (both for authors and the database
				indexers) in pertinent research. Of 2,000 publications surveyed, selecting for
				at least 10 keyword occurrences, the keyword for climate change occurs in 188
				articles with 723 links to other pertinent topics such as carbon, drought,
				and climate models (Fig. 1).  As of October 21, 2022. 
			
				
				
					The node for climate change in the Scopus corpus demonstrates its
						proximity to numerous topics important to not only the sciences but also the
						humanities.
					
					Screenshot of a network disgram. The network has large notes around words like Climate Change, Carbon, and China
				
				
				
			
			While not the leading keyword in the Scopus corpus (these being article,
				controlled study, and nonhuman), climate change is in the top 15, indicating its
				relative significance. As a keyword, then, climate change presents significant
				inroads for a variety of ecological issues with which literary studies, as well
				as the digital humanities, will benefit from informed engagement. 
			When evaluating the corpora, I do not critique any author, journal, or publisher
				for how a given citation does or does not employ certain keywords. This is in
				part because the MLA International Bibliography’s keyword selection process is
				unclear. The Modern Language Association’s website for the database notes the
				number of indexers who cite publications and the thousands of terms they use
				for indexing , but
				does not mention if keywords derive from authors, journals, or other parties. I
				also do not know if the initial stage of keyword selection affects later
				indexing of pertinent metadata. I therefore survey this corpus of journal
				citations mindful of the many components that result in a keyword’s appearance
				in a scholarly database. The article’s conclusion considers how responding to
				these limitations may inspire more effective indexing practices for future
				digital environmental humanities projects, in addition to future
				contemporary literary studies and digital humanities scholarship (not to say
				that the two are distinct). These digital environmental humanities projects include not only analyses of
				emergent cultural forms   , but also ongoing conversations about how the digital humanities
				will respond to climate change through its methods, tools, and critiques of
				extant technologies   . 

				
			Reference Case: ISLE
			 Since its 1993 debut, ISLE: Interdisciplinary Studies in
					Literature and Environment (hereafter ISLE) has
				served as a hub for environmental scholarship in literary studies. As its editors wrote in its first issue, ISLE’s founding reflects the rapid growth of ecological criticism in
				the United States in recent years, which in turn reflects the steady increase in
				the production of environmental literature and nature writing over the past
				several decades and the attendant increased visibility of such writing in
				college literature courses . At the time of writing, 29 volumes of ISLE have been published as part of the Association
				for the Study of Literature and environment. The journal’s mission statement
				pinpoints its influence as a pillar for literary studies: Celebrating the rich
				confluence of environmental humanities, ecocriticism, and environmental
				justice, ISLE welcomes submissions from authors creatively engaging these fields
				from a broad range of disciplines, geographies, and perspectives. ISLE invites
				scholarly articles and creative writing that interpret the environment in
				complex, imaginative, and generative ways . Owing to the journal’s long
				publication history and dedicated interest in the ways cultural texts grapple
				with environmental issues, and how these issues are explored through such genres
				as climate fiction and ecopoetics, ISLE presents a
				fruitful archive for bibliometric analysis. I therefore refer to ISLE as a reference case that generates an array of keywords for literary studies scholarship concerned with the environment. 
			 The ISLE corpus presents multiple occurrences of climate
				change as a keyword. The VOSviewer tool presents clusters that cohere around
				significant keyword occurrences at various scales. Links between clusters
				suggest the relative significance of keywords to other relevant topics of
				interest. An initial reading of the ISLE corpus suggests
				the significance of keywords (referred to as subject terms in the MLA
				International Bibliography) such as ecocritical approach, american
				literature, and nature (Fig. 2), many of which characterize the initial
				stages of ecocriticism in the US. 
				
				
					An Overlay Visualization of keywords in the ISLE
					corpus. Nodes in darker shades of blue indicate older keywords, while nodes
						in brighter shades of yellow indicate newer keywords. The node between climate
						change and ecocritical approach is environmental crisis.
					
					Screenshot of a network diagram with large nodes around ecocritical, nature, american literature
				
				
				
			While these keyword clusters are the most frequent at a scale of 10 occurrences in
				the top 50, they are not the most recent. More recent clusters of significance
				include postapocalyptic novel, environmental crisis, and climate change.
				The environmental crisis keyword occurs 85 times, with 29 links to other
				clusters; the climate change keyword occurs 18 times with 13 links. As we can
				read environmental crisis in several ways, a discrepancy emerges between these
				two keywords in the ISLE corpus. Does environmental
				crisis refer to climate change, a mass extinction event, or something else
				entirely? Does indexing environmental crisis preclude the mention of climate
				change, making the keywords mutually exclusive? 
			Closer analysis of the ISLE clusters hardly distinguishes
				the keywords. Scaling down from ten to five keyword occurrences produces
				environmental crisis and climate change nodes with more connections in the
				top 50: the former adds 23 links for a total of 52 connections while the latter
				gains three for a total of 16. The node for environmental crisis links with
				meat, petroleum industry, and social justice. The node for climate
				change does not link to any nodes not already connected to environmental
				crisis, suggesting that the conceptual keyword of environmental crisis
				includes but is not limited to climate change. Three ISLE articles in the corpus indexed with climate change are also
				indexed with environmental crisis   . Our empirical knowledge of climate change daily evolves with
				applied modeling and research, Though well-documented across the globe,
					reports from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) offer the
					most current scientific consensus on climate change.  and, whether
				in popular media coverage or in everyday conversation, we commonly do not
				associate the phrase environmental crisis with ecological catastrophe more
				than we do climate change. As a conceptual keyword, climate change is
				commonplace among environmental humanists, scientists, and policymakers alike.
				At the same time, the conceptual keyword environmental
				crisis may lend itself to complexities that climate change does not present
				because the former touches on issues such as pollution, biodiversity loss, and
				changing ecosystems. These more specific problems and their local occurrences
				are not always direct effects of climate change. Consequently, indexing an
				article with the keyword environmental crisis may misrepresent its account of
				environmental issues that require further contextualization. 
			 It should not surprise us that climate change occurs significantly in the ISLE corpus. Yet it is surprising that the
				environmental crisis cluster seemingly absorbs the climate change cluster in
				that the former attaches to topics discussed in concert with climate science.
				Though I argue that the distinction between environmental crisis and climate
				change remains significant, the ISLE reference corpus
				presents a valuable example of wrestling with the two keywords as only two among
				many in its set. Now that we have seen a sampling of keywords from the ISLE corpus, we can see how these keywords emerge, or do
				not emerge, in the other corpora that are not exclusively concerned with the
				environmental humanities. 

				
			
			Test Cases: Contemporary Literature, MFS, and PMLA
			 This section reviews the Contemporary Literature (CL), MFS Modern Fiction Studies
					(MFS), and Publications of the
					Modern Language Association (PMLA) corpora.
				While these journals have not historically foregrounded climate change as an
				object of inquiry, I look to their corpora to consider how their recent keywords
				reflect contemporary literary studies’ emergent interests in climate change.
				With the ISLE keywords as a reference for work elsewhere
				in literary studies, I am interested in analyzing how journals indexed in the
				same database do, and do not, engage similar and dissimilar keywords. I begin
				with CL, which publishes scholarly articles and book
				reviews. CL published the first articles on Thomas
				Pynchon and Susan Howe and the first interviews with Margaret Drabble and Don
				DeLillo; it also helped to introduce Kazuo Ishiguro, Eavan Boland, and J. M.
				Coetzee to American readers . As of late, CL has also published
				ecocritical and environmental humanist scholarship. The most recent volume in
				the corpus includes articles that consider Black American conceptions of land
				use , postapocalyptic environmental conditions in the novel Red Plenty , and a review of scholarship on
				the Anthropocene and cultural production in the Global South .
			 In the CL corpus, climate change as a keyword occurs
				infrequently. At 10 occurrences in the top 50, no climate change or
				environmental crisis clusters occur. Scaling the corpus down further by
				selecting for five keyword occurrences in the top one hundred produces
				ecocriticism and environmental crisis nodes quite distant from the network’s
				center (Fig. 3). Each cluster numbers six occurrences, indicating their relative
				insignificance in the corpus. 
				
				
					Node for environmental crisis in an Overlay Visualization of the CL corpus. Note the node’s connection to nature and
						ecocriticism at the top of the graph. 
					
					A screenshot of the network diagram from figure 2, zoomed in on the community around "american literature"
				
		
			The occurrence of environmental crisis changes at subsequent scales. Selecting
				for one keyword in the top five hundred, environmental crisis occurs six times
				with eighteen links. Selecting for one keyword in the top seven
				hundred-and-fifty, the occurrence count of environmental crisis remains the
				same but adds new links. A cluster for climate change does not occur at any of
				these scales. We must scale down considerably to find a cluster: selecting for
				one keyword in the top one thousand registers a single occurrence of climate
				change with four cluster links.
			 At first glance, these results corroborate the MLA International Bibliography’s
				listing of CL’s citations: only one article in the last
				20 years has been indexed with climate change . At the
					time of writing. This does not mean the corpus does not include
				citations geared toward prominent environmental issues, as the environmental
				crisis keyword surfaces when scaling down. The six citations indexed with
				environmental crisis are not indexed with climate change, though they are
				indexed with important topics such as global warming, pesticide, poisoning, and
				violence. In the corpus, these citations include both reviews 
				   and articles  . Because the environmental crisis cluster in the CL
				corpus is attached to a constellation of topics, the corpus presents a
				notable discursive gap between the use of environmental crisis and climate
				change. If the latter is used seldomly, the former is used in reference to
				important topics that may, or may not, be discussed separately from climate
				change. 
			 I now turn my attention to the MFS corpus. MFS publishes articles and book reviews concerned with
				twentieth- and twenty-first century literature on a quarterly basis, with an
				emphasis on modernist, postmodernist, and contemporary fiction. A journal with a
				prestigious publishing record of nearly 60 years, MFS is
				a benchmark publication for innovative debates and topics in contemporary
				literary studies. Of note to this article is the fact that MFS
				has published multiple special issues concerned with climate change and
				related environmental issues. These special issues include Modern Fiction and
					the Ecological: The Futures of Ecocriticism , Anthropocene
						Fictions , and Literature and Extraction ; the
				first special issue in that list published prominent environmental humanist Rob
				Nixon’s early writing on slow violence .
			 Compared to the CL corpus, the occurrence of climate
				change as a keyword in the MFS corpus differs greatly.
				The emergence of an environmental crisis node at the scale of 10 keyword
				occurrences in the top 50 suggests the cluster’s relative significance. However,
				no climate change cluster emerges. Scaling down to five keyword occurrences in
				the top fifty and top one hundred returns the same result. Scaling the corpus
				down to one keyword in the top five hundred produces a climate change cluster
				with three occurrences and fourteen links to other keywords (Fig. 4). Several
				clusters related to the environment occur at this scale, including ecology,
				ecocritical approach, environmental movement, natural gas industry,
				petroleum industry, and plant imagery. 
				
				
					Bottom center location of climate change as a keyword in an overlay
						visualization of the MFS corpus. Note the node’s size
						compared to environmental crisis in a nearly vertical position.
					
					Screenshot of network diagram from figure 2, zoomed in on the community around ecocritical approach
				
				
			
	
			Different keyword connections for climate change and environmental crisis
				characterize their occurrence in the MFS corpus. While
				the former keyword primarily occurs around geopolitical clusters such as united
				states imperialism and afghanistan war (2000-2021), the latter connects to
				petroleum industry, nature, and ecocritical approach. While I do not mean
				to focus on these two keywords throughout the essay, these distinctions are
				worth noting, as many of the environmental crisis connections are relevant to
				any literary studies account of climate change. Three citations appear that
				explicitly address climate change   ;
				searching elsewhere in the corpus, citations with environmental crisis
				represent a range of important but different environmental issues. 
			Databases such as the MLA International Bibliography operate with directed user
				engagement, and the difference between keyword selection may elide opportunities
				for accessible engagement. Regarding such engagement in the MFS corpus, we can turn to Caroline Levine’s article The Long Lure
						of Anti-Instrumentality: Politics, Aesthetics, and Sustainability as an example of disjunctions in keyword indexing. Levine’s article
				asks readers to revise conceptions of literature’s anti-instrumentality in the
				context of climate change’s emergence . Levine situates this argument
				for literature’s instrumentality in the context of extant issues such as climate
				migration, resource allocation, ecological degradation, and climate denialism
				and pessimism , Levine’s article provokes new ways of thinking
				about climate change and contemporary literary studies in scholarship and
				pedagogy. In the MLA International Bibliography, Levine’s article is indexed
				with three keywords: themes and figures; aesthetics; and left-wing
					politics. At the time of writing.  Climate change is absent from this list. Yet the term climate is used 18 times throughout the article, with 8 unique instances of climate change. In highlighting the indexing of Levine’s
				article, I do not aim to criticize any party for the absence of climate change
				as a keyword; we should still read, consider, and cite the article regardless of
				how it is indexed. While reading
				through journals may remain the best way to assess their scholarship, many
				contemporary scholars instead rely on Googling, library search portal browsing,
				and databases. Scholars’ targeted research practices help them get what they
				need when they need it (especially when increased teaching loads and immensely
				reduced funding opportunities undermine research capacities), and precise
				keyword selection makes the difference. Yet the absence of climate change as a keyword impedes our
				engagement with articles such as Levine’s that discuss it with significance. 
			 My final test case, the PMLA corpus — which is
				significantly larger than either the CL or MFS corpora — publishes scholarship on a diverse range
				of fields and periods in literary studies, including contemporary literature.
				The journal’s active cultivation of novel approaches speaks to its importance,
				not only as the cornerstone publication of the Modern Language Association but
				also as a publication for established disciplinary conversations. As its website
				states, The ideal  PMLA essay exemplifies the best of its kind, whatever the
				kind; addresses a significant problem; draws out clearly the implications of its
				findings; and engages the attention of its audience through a concise, readable
				presentation . PMLA is
				also a competitive site for submission: disciplinary journals may therefore not
				be as receptive to relatively new work, or even submissions from graduate
				students and junior scholars . However, PMLA has published work relevant to contemporary literary studies,
				the digital humanities  , the environmental humanities,
				and even an early iteration of digital environmental humanities referred to as the ecological digital
					humanities , even as much of the journal’s writing
				offers surveys of scholarship in their respective topics. 
			 Starting with 10 keyword occurrences in the top 50, no environmental crisis or
				climate change clusters emerge in the corpus. The notable absence of climate
				change is still visible when we scale for at five keywords in the top fifty and
				top one hundred. At each of these scales, zero clusters emerge for topics
				associated with environmental issues. A cluster for climate change appears if
				we select for one keyword occurrence in the top five hundred: the keyword occurs
				six times and links with twenty-six additional clusters (Fig. 5). 
				
				
					An Overlay Visualization of climate change as a keyword in the PMLA corpus. The node (directly in the center) does not
						share significant associations with other clusters.
					
					Screenshot of network diagram focused on the word "poetry"
				
				
		
			Additional clusters associated with environmental issues emerge at this scale,
				including nature, ecocriticism, landscape, and even anthropocene epoch.
				In two unique citations, climate change is indexed with nature; in two other
				citations, with weather (also seasons of the year in one of those two); in
				another unique citation, with environmental studies; and, in a final unique
				citation, pollution and industrialization  
				   . In the PMLA corpus, then, climate change as a keyword enjoys
				distinct cluster connections that speak to different yet interconnected topics.
				For example, we have Philip Steer’s [2021] recent article on nineteenth-century
				Britain, Australia, and the Anthropocene with climate change as a keyword.
				Environmental crisis occurs as a keyword twice, and neither citation is
				indexed with climate change or the above terms  . Is
				there a tradition of selecting environmental crisis in lieu of or as
				complement to climate change in ISLE, CL, and MFS but not in PMLA? This difference may account for the concerns of field- or
				period-based journals versus disciplinary journals. ISLE, CL, and MFS
				publish scholarship with foci relevant to scholars; PMLA
				publishes scholarship with a broad focus for multiple fields. Regardless of
				their differences, each corpus presents different accounts of climate change
				as a keyword. 

				Conclusion: Keywords and Digital Environmental Humanities
			 How fields such as contemporary literary studies and the digital humanities
				respond to climate change requires shared conceptual keywords that extend beyond
				disciplines. In the future, we may wish to derive inspiration for these terms
				from various keyword projects 
				. In addition, we may write a publicly
				available keyword selection guide for precise database indexing and engagement:
				Lauren Klein and Catherine D’Ignazio’s [2020] discussion of datasheets as a
				contextual tool for big datasets may serve as first step toward realizing this
				approach, encouraging what Johanna Drucker may refer to as a more sustainable
				digital humanities praxis [2021]. In this case, I suggest a specific lexicon for
				environmental issues and how they connect to climate change. Although some may
				say that all humanities work is in some way imbricated in climate change , I argue that only humanities work that
				explicitly addresses climate change should merit attention as climate humanities
				scholarship. For instance, an essay that addresses topics such as climate-induced biodiversity shifts,
				climate engineering, or climate fiction should be indexed with climate change
				only if the essay makes a significant connection between said topics and climate
				change. Such meaningful connections allow us to avoid the nebulousness of
				environmental crisis, which does not offer as many interdisciplinary
				inroads. This is not to overlook the fact that keyword indexing can be an
				imperfect practice; however, I hope my results show that it can be standardized
				for renowned publications interested in publishing on the topic. 
			A systematic adoption of keywords, as Williams writes, grants us a vocabulary to
				use, to find our own ways in, to change as we find it necessary to change it, as
				we go on making our own language and history . Whether one works in
				contemporary literary studies or the digital humanities (or both), following
				similarly determined examples of keyword selection will ensure continued
				collective meaning making in scholarly discourse. Students, scholars, and
				teachers interested in digital environmental humanities will also benefit from deliberate indexing choices.
				As the digital environmental humanities take on new, forms, effective indexing practices that precisely frame
				discussions of climate change in teaching, scholarship, and outward facing
				projects will enrich the field’s interdisciplinary significance. At the same
				time, because climate change is a phrase with meaning beyond academic
				indexing, it can be a keyword that encompasses diverse yet globally
				interconnected environmental issues; subsuming it within the environmental
				crisis hierarchy only dilutes outward access to such scholarship. 

				Acknowledgements
				My thanks to Matt Hannah for feedback on the project in its many stages. My gratitude, as well, to the DHQ reviewers for their suggestions.
			
