Title:  AR and Public Participation in Maputo City: An
               Exploratory Study
Volume:  017
Issue:  4
Date:  15 December 2023
Abstract:  
            
            This study examines the potential of using Augmented Reality to increase urban
               participation to deal with identified problems in Maputo city, Mozambique, southern
               Africa. The study’s aim is twofold; first, it seeks to add to the nascent literature
               on Augmented Reality (AR) in Africa; second, to experiment with AR for public
               participation in urban Maputo to explore the affordances of AR and examine the
               possibility and limitations of deploying the technology for such purposes. The study
               concludes that AR can enhance public participation and engagement with public spaces
               in Maputo city. However, technical and economic limitations must be considered when
               designing projects to deploy AR technologies in the city.
         
Full Body Text: 

            1. Introduction
            Cities worldwide are increasingly seeking to promote urban citizens’ participation in
               urban planning, development, and management to grapple with the severe challenges
               they face ; . That
               movement results from the neoliberalisation process that seeks to bring the private,
               and civil society sectors and citizens into urban governance. In that movement,
               different actors defend the idea that technology can further improve urban governance
               and, important to this study, public participation. One such technology that has been
               employed to open-up urban spaces for public engagement is augmented reality
               (henceforth, AR). This study constitutes an exploratory approach to examining the
               potential of using AR to increase urban participation and address identified problems
               in Maputo city, Mozambique, southern Africa. The study seeks to contribute to
               burgeoning scholarship that focuses on how technologies could enhance public
               participation and improve urban governance and service delivery with the material
               from the global south. Specifically, the study intervenes in the scholarship that has
               taken the name of AR graffiti and AR Activism and examines how AR could be used to
               engage in politics around urban spaces, urban citizenry, urban arts, and other
               domains ; ; . 
            AR is a recent technology that is part of mixed reality (XR) technologies. Mixed
               Realities technologies include Augmented Virtuality, Virtual Reality and Reduced
               Reality ; . Those designations
               have to do with how technologies intervene in the real-world and situate the user in
               the continuum between the virtual and the real-world. Jonathan Linowes and Krystian
               Babilinski define AR as a technology and, more importantly, a
                  new medium whose purpose is to improve human experiences, whether they be directed
                  tasks, learning, communication, or entertainment
               . According to Ronald Azuma, AR systems present
               the following features: Combines real and virtual; Interactive
                  in real-time; and registered in three dimensions (3-D)
               . AR does so by relaying computer-generated graphs
               in the real-world using a smartphone or tablet. 
            Seeking to explore the affordances of AR, this study looks at AR as more than a
               technological apparatus that enables the relaying of computer graphics on real-world.
               Instead, the study frames AR as a form of intervention in the real-world and the
               perception of the user — in other words, AR creates new phenomenological experiences
               on the users while also intervening in the real-world ;
                  . This approach is inspired by AR artist Thiel Tamiko
               (see ) and the scholarly work of Vladmir Geroimenko . Following that approach, then AR is best
               conceptualized as real-time computationally mediated
                  perception
               . 
            As the literature review on this study will show, the few existing studies on AR and
               public participation (including artistic) have occurred mostly in the context of the
               global north. Studies on that topic are limited in the global south and nearly
               nonexistent in contexts like Mozambique, a Portuguese-speaking country characterised
               by digital, socio-economic, and ruled and the rulers
               divides that need to be addressed ; ; . 
            This study was conducted in Maputo city, the capital of Mozambique. Highligting the
               city’s histories and present predicaments is crucial as a way of contextualizing the
               affordances that AR can provide — enhancing public participation. Maputo city was
               constructed during the colonial period by the Portuguese colonial settlers It
                  was then called Lourenço Marques after a
                  Portuguese trader.. It was elevated to a city on 10 November 1887. It was
               then constructed for the white settlers. Most black people were moved to the
               periphery of the city that constitutes today’s shanty areas. That racial and spatial
               segregation is best captured by what locals called the city: they referred to the
               city as xilunguine, meaning the land of the whites.
               Mozambique became independent in 1975, after an armed struggle The armed
                  struggle started in 1964 and ended in 1974, a year before independence..
               However, the colonial debris (racial and spatial segregation policies) still shapes
               the city’s current life. Those colonial legacies intersect with today’s challenges
               including over-population, overburdened urban infrastructures, poor solid waste
               management service, climate change impacts, and related to this work, a sense of
               gaping divide between the government and the citizens. In the survey circulated among
               fifty-seven residents of the city as part of this project most respondents mentioned
               that the divide between the municipality and them as being one of their main
               concerns. The responses also highlighted that solid waste management was one of the
               most pressing issues in the city that, according to them, negatively affected their
               quality of life and perception of the city. 
            Against that backdrop, the study’s aim is twofold; first, it seeks to add to the
               incipient literature on Augmented Reality and public participation in public urban
               spaces; second, to experiment with AR for public participation in urban Maputo to
               explore the affordances of AR and examine the possibility and limitations of
               deploying the technology to address the issue of solid waste management in the city.
               The study does so by creating an AR art object called the Trash Snail that the study
               participants could deploy in the city to make the issues of solid waste management
               visible using their mobile devices. 
            The next section reviews both the scholarly and grey literature on AR and Virtual
               Reality (henceforth, VR) with a special focus on Africa, where similar conditions of
               the deployment of AR are found. Section three is the methodology section where the
               surveys and design of the AR experience Trash Snail are explained. Section four is
               the analysis and results section that examines the responses of the survey
               participants and shows how the issue of solid waste management is foregrounded in
               their responses. By drawing on AR arts practices, the study examines the experiments
               of deploying the Trash Snail App on urban Maputo to make the issue of solid waste
               management visible. Finally, the discussion and conclusion identifies the main
               findings of the experiments of deploying AR for public participation in Maputo city
               and the relevance of the experiments in similar contexts.
         

            2. Related Work
            In this section, the study reviews some of the literature and projects done in AR and
               Virtual Reality on the African continent. The choice of focusing on both technologies
               and limiting the geographical emphasis to Africa has to do with the fact that while
               both technologies are burgeoning in the global north, few studies and projects exist
               exploring them in the global south. While Virtual Reality presupposes a total
               immersion of the user into a virtual environment using Gadgets or glasses, AR
               enhances the user’s reality . This review seeks to
               foreground the potential of the AR technology as a catalyst of change in the African
               continent. 
            One field in which AR technology has gained traction is tourism. In South Africa,
               scholars and practitioners have proposed using AR to enhance the tourism experience
               and deal with the existing shortages in the sector. For example, Aphile Kondlo and
               colleagues observed the need for more tourist guides in the Cape Flats Nature
               Reserve, situated in the Western Cape, South Africa. The Reserve provides guided
               tours only once a day. The authors argue that that shortage could be mitigated using
               AR self-guided tours. That would mean that more self-guided tours could happen and,
               in the process, generate more income for the reserve . 
            Because tourism is a large industry in Africa, the International Finance Corporation
               (visit https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/corp_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/home)
               estimated that in 2019 tourism accounted for approximately 7% of Africa’s overall GDP
               and contributed $169bn to its economy. Hence, it is no surprise that in 2021, DPVR, a
               Shanghai-based company, announced a partnership with Travel Africa Network (TAN), a
               South African satellite travel TV channel, to provide VR solutions to promote tourism
               on the continent . 
            Other sectors that VR and AR have seen growing interest in are museums and
               storytelling. For example, Electric South and the Goethe-Institut presented a vibrant
               exhibition of African VR named New Dimensions - Virtual Reality
                  Africa, which showcases artworks from artists from Kenya, Senegal, and
               Ghana on their website . In South Africa, the museum
               Origins Centre at Witwatersrand University created a virtual reality exhibition of
               African fossils, art, and artefacts that enable visitors to interact with the past
                  . Also in South Africa, Africarare became the first
               metaverse to seek to showcase African creativity and modes of living (visit https://www.africarare.io/). The
               platform enables artists to sell their work. In Nigeria, multiple projects, and
               forums for discussion about the importance of the digitisation of cultural heritage,
               have also produced encouraging results. Also in South Africa, Makhulu Media recorded
               a 360° video of a young man that decided to know his virological situation (visit
                  https://unicrio.org.br/na-africa-do-sul-programa-da-onu-lanca-videos-em-realidade-virtual-sobre-teste-de-hiv/).
               The UN-AIDS organization financed the video and sought to explore the potential of
               the empathy machine
                — a name that Virtual Reality is also known for due to
               its ability to make the user experience the life or world of another person
               phenomenologically through the mediation of a VR headset — to encourage young people
               to be tested and understand the plight of the people infected by the HIV-AIDS virus. 
            Education is another sector where the use of VR and AR to enhance the sector and deal
               with its shortcomings has increased. However, most work in this sector is still in
               the exploratory phase. For example, David Lockwood prepared a pilot study of the use
               of VR in education in Uganda and South Africa that UNESCO commissioned. The author
               concluded that students and teachers found using VR in the classroom satisfactory and
               enjoyable . The African Leadership University (ALU),
               known for its innovative and business-oriented education model, has embraced VR in
               classrooms as an educational tool (visit https://www.alueducation.com/virtual-reality-african-education/); however,
               little information exists about the project’s status. Equally, Angelina Misso and
               colleagues explored the potential of using VR in education in Tanzania . They found that respondents were aware of the technology
               and believed it could enhance the learning experience in the country. Similar
               exploratory works of AR and VR in education were done in South Africa . Also, the University of Witwatersrand in
               Johannesburg, South Africa, has started a pilot study of VR to teach students in STEM
               disciplines that they expect to replicate in other schools and universities in the
               country. However, much like with the explorations in Uganda and South Africa
               described above not much is known about those projects in the present, which limits
               the understanding of their long-term impacts in the locales where they were
               implemented. 
            One of the areas where VR is prospering in Africa beyond the exploratory phase is the
               gaming industry. For example, In Morocco, Funsoft produced a VR puzzle game called
               Rangi that draws on African art, music, folklore, and culture to create its world
               (visit https://www.oculus.com/blog/explore-african-culture-and-solve-puzzles-in-rangi-now-available-on-rift/).
               In South Africa, the V&A Waterfront in Cape Town got the world’s first permanent
               arcades to enable gamers to use the newest VR headsets in an old-school arcade
               environment (visit https://mygaming.co.za/news/entertainment/101152-south-africa-is-getting-one-of-the-worlds-first-vr-arcades.
               The use of AR and VR for gaming is one people associate the technologies with most.
               In the case of this study’s respondents, one of them, when asked whether he knew what
               AR was, responded that yes, in Gaming, but 52 (out of
               57) responded that they had not heard about AR. 
            VR and AR have also found their way into the industrial and small enterprise sectors.
               In South Africa, the high incidence of accidents in the mining industry has made it
               so that the South African government has been trying to teach mine workers about
               safety protocols to reduce accidents. In 2001, CSIR Miningtek developed a PC-based VR
               hazard awareness training simulator to train miners .
               Only a little information exists in the present about its status. In Kenya, Black
               Rhino, a company created in 2015 focusing on producing documentaries and stories,
               recently embraced VR in its business after Facebook acquired Oculus for 2 billion
               dollars. Their work includes immersive documentaries, news format content, education,
               marketing, advertising, and AR (visit https://www.blackrhinovr.com/services/). In South Africa, VR360.oc.za
               started operating in VR in the late 1990s and produced street view maps using 360
               degrees videos. The company works in virtual tours, virtual reality, and creative
               industries (visit https://vr360.co.za/about-vr360/). Still, in South Africa, bizAR Reality
               started operations in 2015, working on immersive technologies. They produce AR for
               their client’s websites, social media, smart glasses, and apps and games (https://www.bizarreality.co.za/ar/). One leading organisation in AR and VR
               in Nigeria is Imisi3D which seeks to build a community of VR and AR enthusiasts in
               the continent (visit https://imisi3d.com/).
               Moreover, the Start-up list Africa identified start-ups from more than 25 countries
               that have embraced VR in their business model (visit https://startuplist.africa/industry/virtual-reality). The growth of
               start-ups in this area shows that VR and AR are increasingly gaining popularity on
               the continent.
            Another area that is closer to the interest of this study is the use of AR for public
               participation in public spaces. The use of VR and AR in public spaces is the least
               explored element on the continent. Speaking of the affordances of VR and AR, Virpi
               Oksman and Mika Raunio argued that […] these tools can be used
                  to increase transparency and inclusive engagement in city planning
                and explored the potential of their use in
               Keetmanshoop, Namibia. An exploratory study on the potential of AR and VR to enhance
               public participation in urban planning is a report created in 2019, with the title
                  Mixed Reality for Public Participation in Urban and Public
                  Space Design: Towards a new way of Crowdsourcing more Inclusive Smart
                  Cities containing a pilot study in South Africa. The UN-Habitat
               organization commissioned the study. Much like Oksman and Raunio’s study, the
               UN-Habitat’s report highlighted that MR could enhance the participation of multiple
               stakeholders such as municipalities’ urban planning departments,
                  architect firms, engineering companies, and game developers
               . In other words, AR had the potential to
               enhance collaboration and public participation on issues related to the governance,
               planning and development of public spaces.
            
               2.1. Limitations and opportunities of VR and AR in Africa
               The brief survey of VR and AR use in Africa highlighted above underscore some of
                  the most exciting prospects of the emerging VR and AR technologies in the
                  continent but also their pitfalls. As seen above, most work in those fields is
                  still exploratory, and few studies exist detailing the successes and failures of
                  the different pilot projects conducted in the sectors of education, tourism,
                  museums and storytelling, business and industry, gaming industry, and relevant to
                  this study, public participation in urban public spaces. For example, not much is
                  known about the long-standing impacts of the deployment of AR in those sectors,
                  hence their ability to be sustainable. 
               The cases reviewed above show that the inexistence of proper infrastructures, the
                  prohibitive prices of internet data bundles, and the shortage of reliable funding
                  hinder the public’s use of AR and VR in Africa beyond the early adopters and
                  technology enthusiasts on the continent. However, some international organisations
                  are starting to set up funding agencies, collaborating with African agencies and
                  organisations to set up funding for AR and VR interventions in the continent. For
                  example, Africa No Filter (ANF) and Meta have recently established a program named
                     Future Africa: telling Stories, Building Worlds
                  that aims to increase the use of VR in Africa. The program grants African
                  storytellers up to USD30000 to produce digital media stories (visit https://africanofilter.org/future-africa-telling-stories-building-worlds).
                  The other example mentioned above is the DPVR, a Shanghai-based VR headset
                  manufacturer, and Travel Africa Network (TAN), a cable network broadcaster from
                  South Africa, partnership agreement to explore the potential of tourism in Africa
                  using VR and AR. In 2022, Meta organised a continent-wide Hackathon for VR and AR
                  in Africa, bringing enthusiasts and field specialists to explore the continent's
                  technologies. Those embryonic experiments show that VR and AR have a place in the
                  continent and can play a role in solving the continent’s challenges. 
               The examples reviewed above show that AR has indeed a potential for transforming
                  social relations on multiple domains including education, tourism, GLAMS,
                  industry, city planning and others. AR has the potential to elicit public
                  participation. However, most studies reviewed showed that the use of the
                  technology is still in its infancy and mostly exploratory. Little is known about
                  their operations in the present and their long-term impacts. That is the
                  limitation that this study seeks to address.
            
         

            3. Methodology
            This study resulted from qualitative approach to gathering, analysing, and
               communicating data. The study emerged out of trial and error, technological and
               economic constraints, and COVID-19 restrictions on mobility that the researcher had
               to navigate to implement the study. 
            The specific site for the AR experience was Maputo City. Maputo's choice was due to
               its being the country's largest city. It is also where the political and economic
               elite of the country is based. Those conditions make it so that the city has more
               reliable mobile phone coverage, and many young people living in the city own a
                  smartphone Since only a few people own an iPhone in Maputo, it was decided
                  to develop an app for android smartphones.. It is crucial to note that AR
               experiences have restrictive requirements and this significantly reduced the number
               of participants in this study. The study will discuss those limitations in the
               analysis and results chapter. 
            Additionally, the choice of Maputo was because it is the capital city where most
               opportunities exist. The more people live in a city, the more solid waste is
               produced, and a timelier response from the municipalities is required. Those material
               conditions made it so that an experience of AR in Maputo was likely to yield a more
               significant impact on urban dwellers.

            
               3.1. Data collection methods
               The study employed a participatory approach, meaning that the participants’ voices
                  and opinions were central and informed the design of the Trash Snail. Participants
                  actively engaged in downloading and deploying the Trash Snail on their
                  smartphones. However, it is crucial to highlight that the ongoing COVID-19
                  pandemic constrained such a participatory approach and that the study was
                  conducted from Sweden, where I currently live. The study engaged with the city and
                  the participants by resorting to technology, like the cloud-based program
                  Survey&Report and phone calls. 
               One of the affordances of AR is that physical borders and space do not constrain
                  it. Hence, designing an experience that anyone with the app worldwide could engage
                  in was possible. At first, there was a plan to produce a geolocated AR experience
                  that would be placed at Maputo City Hall, where the municipality is housed;
                  however, because GPS is not reliable in Maputo and that experience was more
                  centralising (meaning more people would be concentrated in one area during COVID
                  19), then it was decided that the used plane detection technology in Vuforia Unity
                  Engine would be better because it enabled each user to place the snail in a
                  specific locale of their choice. 
               For this specific project, using Vuforia Unity Engine, an interactive AR
                  application named Lix.AR Maputo was produced through which participants could
                  display a Trash Snail on public locales with solid waste that needed to be
                  properly managed. The app and Trash Snail was inspired by the study participants’
                  responses to a survey conducted during the first and second weeks of February
                  2022. 
               The study collected the participants’ responses using an online questionnaire
                  created via Survey & Report. A link was shared to the survey on social media
                  networks, such as WhatsApp and Facebook (Meta). Respondents who resided in Maputo
                  or were in Maputo two weeks before the survey were asked to respond and share the
                  survey on their social media handles. 
               The survey was conducted in Portuguese, the official language of Mozambique, and
                  consisted of 18 questions. The first six questions were structured and asked about
                  gender, age, profession, physical condition, residence, and workplace location and
                  aimed at producing a demographic and spatial profile of the participants. 
               The next five questions were also structured and asked about the study
                  participants’ use of Maputo public spaces, frequency, reason for the visit, and
                  means of transport to and from the public spaces. This set of questions sought to
                  get data about the different uses of the public spaces or lack thereof that could
                  be connected to the issues of public spaces and access in Maputo city. Finally,
                  the last six questions were unstructured and asked about the city study
                  participants’ perceptions of the public spaces regarding what they liked and did
                  not like. Some of the responses to those questions were used in the epigraphs of
                  this study, and they were also fundamental in selecting waste as the main problem
                  in public spaces that needed to be addressed. 
               Regarding the opinion of the participants about the challenges of the public
                  spaces, apart from the lack of inclusion in public spaces design and management,
                  they reported that waste (lixo), sanitation (limpeza), lack (falta), and spaces (espaços), noise (barulho), maintenance (manutenção) and safety (segurança) as
                  being the main issues plaguing public urban spaces in the city (see figure below). 
               
                  QSR NVivo word cloud with 50 most common words highlighting the main issues
                     in public urban spaces.
                  
                  Word cloud rendering.
               

               Altogether, the survey enabled the study to gather the participants’ profiles,
                  their uses of public spaces, and the challenges around the public spaces, namely,
                  solid waste, as the word cloud above suggests. Then the study used the
                  participants’ answers to design an AR experience Lix.AR Maputo, following the AR
                  art practice . 
               In Unity Vuforia Engine Asset Store, the AR Shadow (AR Foundation: Arkit/ARCore:
                  Plane Detection Template with AR Shader) that provided a template to build the
                  canvas, shade, and plane detection was acquired. Then the 3D Trash Snail was
                  created using the open-access online platform Monster Mash and the software
                  Blender to save the file in an FBX (Filmbox) format that could be used in Unity
                  Vuforia Engine. The Trash Snail was created by randomly cutting an image that was 
                  extracted from a 2020 news article from Radio Moçambique , with the title  Maputo
                     municipal  council reinforces garbage collection means (see figure 2
                  below).
               
                  Empty waste containers in Maputo are surrounded by waste. 
                  
                  Newspaper photograph of empty waste containers with garbage on the
                     ground  around them.
               

               What was compelling about the image was the fact that it showed empty containers
                  surrounded by solid waste on the ground. That waste on the ground could be because
                  the municipality only emptied the overflowing containers and did not clean the
                  waste, or urban dwellers did not put the waste into the waste containers. Judging
                  by this photo, it was hard to immediately find who was to
                     blame for the current condition in the locale and other similar
                  conditions in the city. As some of the respondents mentioned, the municipality had
                  to do a better job managing solid waste, but the residents also needed to be
                  educated (sensibilizar) on how to use public spaces and deal
                  with solid waste. 
               Hence the image was good to think with . The image
                  also depicted a mix of organic and inorganic waste, reflecting the city’s general
                  treatment of solid waste or lack thereof. The study participants also found
                  similar situations in other locales, which will later be described in the analysis
                  and results chapter. Then, animations were added to the Trash Snail that resembled
                  the movements of a snail to give the impression of a living creature — living
                  waste. The gruesome movements served as entry points to showcasing how solid waste
                  was itself a matter with social life, despite it been portrayed as a matter out of place that elicits urban dwellers’ and
                  municipality’s responses to get rid of it . Even
                  though it moved the trash snail never left the locale. It is a though it was stuck
                  in a place. That quality of being stuck represents the respondents’ feelings of
                  solid waste not being properly moved out of the public spaces and lingering in
                  their urban spaces. 
               After creating the Trash Snail, people who resided or had been in Maputo two weeks
                  before the study were invited to test the application. The invitation was sent via
                  social media. Seven people accepted the invitation to use and provide their
                  feedback on the AR experiences in two interviews: the first before using the
                  application and the second after using the application. However, only three
                  participants could utilise the app due to the technical limitations and the fact
                  that the study was conducted remotely in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
               The study allowed the participants to respond anonymously to protect their
                  identities. However, the study participants were asked to take a screenshot with
                  their smartphones of the Trash Snail placed in the real world if they were willing
                  to. The study also used those screenshots to draw the analysis and visualise the
                  uses of the AR experience in Maputo city. The study also used that data to
                  communicate the study to a wider audience via social media to draw a wider
                  audience. 
            
         

            4. Analysis and results
            The initial study survey gathered responses from fifty-seven urban participants, of
               which 66,7% responded as being male and 33.3% as female. The data could be biased
               toward male perspectives about public spaces. Regarding age, 12 respondents were
               18-29, and 45 were in the age range of 30-59, meaning that young and adult
               perspectives were mostly gathered in this study, leaving outside older adults and
               children. This high number of young participants might be the effect of children and
               older adults' limited access to mobile phones and the internet. 
            The most revealing part was the residences (bairros) of the
               respondents, which showed quite an interesting mix. 9 out of the 57 respondents
               resided in Maxaquene, a peri-urban neighborhood where the author of this study was
               born. The prevalence of respondents from Maxaquene is likely connected to the fact
               that the questionnaire was shared via this study’s author’s social media handles with
                  friends, some of whom the author lived and grew up with. Only five
               respondents were from the city centre, namely Alto Make (2), Bairro Central (1), and
               Coop (2), which means 52 respondents lived outside of Maputo city but had engaged
               with public spaces in the city. 
            In terms of public spaces that the participants used in the past three months
               (December- February), 68,2% responded that they used municipal markets (mercados municipais), 54,5% reported that they visited beaches
                  (praias) in the city, 50% responded that used plazas (praças), and 43,2% and 29,5% visited gardens (jardins) and parks (parques).
            When asked about what activities they performed in public spaces, 65% responded
               leisure activities (lazer), 41,3% responded meeting with
               friends, partners, relatives, etc. (encontro com amigos, familiars,
                  parceiros, etc.), and 23,9% reported that they used the space for physical
               activities (actividade física). Of the seven respondents that
               answered other (outra), six stated shopping, and one
               respondent studied.

            
               4.1. Residents’ views of the city
               When asked about their opinions on Maputo city public spaces, a study respondent
                  reported a [l]ack of adequate sanitation and hygiene. Lack of
                     garbage bins for waste. And cars occupy sidewalks because there are no
                     available parking spaces. Another respondent reported that the spaces
                  are characterised by badly managed waste, little safety, and
                     no maintenance [of the spaces]. However, respondents also mentioned
                  that the waste problem was due to the municipality’s incapability to keep public
                  spaces clean and stop city dwellers’ from littering them. Hence, they stated the
                  need for raising the urban dwellers’ awareness (in
                  Portuguese sensibilizar) about keeping public spaces clean. 
               The study respondents addressed the need to raise awareness in the following
                  terms: I think that the municipality, through its city
                     councilors overseeing a certain area, should mobilise funds for that end
                     (cleaning public spaces) and add human resources. Also, they should sensibilise
                     the residents and teach them not to litter. Using the respondents’
                  opinions about the main challenges the city faced, the study designed the Trash
                  Snail experience that participants could engage with using their android
                  smartphones or tablets as a form of participation in making the issues of matter out of place visible .
               
            
            
               4.2. Enter AR in Maputo
               The Trash Snail was an attempt to allow the participants to reflect on solid waste
                  issues in urban spaces. Hence, rather than overlaying information in public
                  spaces, the purpose was to create an AR experience that would invite the
                  participants to reflect on the solid waste that shapes urban life, politics,
                  citizens’ understanding of well-being, and the environment in Maputo, much in line
                  with the work of AR art or activism . 
               After the Trash Snail was built, people with an android mobile phone were asked to
                  volunteer to download and use the app on their mobile android smart devices. The
                  invitation was sent via social media platforms. Seven people showed interest in
                  participating in the study and filled out a survey before using the app to gather
                  their profiles and experience with AR. Then a link was sent to download the APK
                  file with those volunteers. 
               However, when installing the app, the volunteers needed some help. First, the AR
                  experience required Google Play AR services; some volunteers’ phones did not
                  support that service. Second, the APK gave a warning sign of possible phone damage
                  due to the APK size. Altogether those aspects made four volunteers give up. 

               
                  Screenshots showing Google Pay Store notifications about device
                     incompatibility with AR.
                  
                  Image of a cell phone screen showing a warning.
               

               Then, the application was listed as an ABB (Android App Bundle) on the Google Play
                  store to ensure that people trusted the application and downloaded it on their
                  phones. The study understood the implications of using Google Play Services in
                  terms of Google extracting data from their users, as discussed by Trzaskowski  and Zuboff ; however,
                  this was not an issue that could easily be mitigated around in this study nor was
                  it within the study’s scope. 
               Listing the app on Google Play Service helped the study gain the remaining three
                  volunteers’ trust in the app. However, it added another challenge. The app could
                  only work with android devices from android 7 (Marshmallow) and above.
                  Furthermore, such devices are also required to have Google Play AR Services.
                  Google Play Store listed only around 514 phone models as being able to use the app
                  worldwide. Many residents of Maputo could not afford those models. None of the
                  three study participants’ models were on that list. 
               Hence, as suggested by this study's supervisor, those participants were asked to
                  find one device that could work following Google Play Service’s stated
                  requirements. The participants managed to find a Samsung A70 device listed on
                  Google’s list of recommended mobile models. After using the app, the three
                  participants were asked to respond to a survey before and after using it, take
                  screenshots of their experiences with the app and send them to this study’s
                  author’s personal WhatsApp number. 
               The participants were all male, aged between 18 and 29, and all lived in the same
                  neighborhood in Maputo called Malanga. Two of them were students, and the other
                  was unemployed. They all learned about AR after the study. The study participants
                  used the app on the 7th of April 2022. It was a public holiday in Mozambique. The
                  participants were instructed to take a screenshot of waste that was not properly
                  managed and then add the specific name and date after taking the screenshot and
                  sharing a pre-written message with me, saying, Lixo que precisa ser retirado [waste that needs to be removed]. 
               One fascinating aspect of the results of such screenshots was that the
                  participants chose to start from their neighborhood, which is a place they knew
                  best. They knew they were very likely to find waste — in this case, in Malanga.
                  That observation highlights the major concerns raised by the study participants
                  about their perception of public spaces. In the first survey, participants
                  reported waste and insecurity as the major problems around public spaces in Maputo
                  (see Figure 1). 

               
                  4.2.3. Screenshots: Making solid waste visible
                  This screenshot (Figure 4) shows the Trash Snail alongside a waste container
                     overflowing with waste. The container is in the Malanga neighborhood at Fajardo
                     Street, Trabalho Avenue.

                  
                     Trash Snail placed at Fajardo Street, Trabalho Avenue, Malanga,
                        Maputo.
                     
                     Image of a full waste container surrounded by garbage. The trash snail
                        AR image floats in front of it.
                  

                  The Trash Snail reaches for a tire on the ground circled by organic waste,
                     including onions and tomatoes sold in the vicinity, mostly plastic inorganic
                     waste.

                  The screenshot in Figure 5 depicts an empty waste container at Rio Tembe Avenue
                     in the Malanga neighborhood.

                  
                     Trash Snail placed at Rio Tembe Avenue, Malanga, Maputo.
                     
                     Image of an empty waste container surrounded by garbage. The trash
                        snail AR image floats on the ground in front of the container.
                  

                  A barraca (barrack) in red sells food and beverages behind
                     the container. Behind the barrack, there is a secondary school. While the waste
                     container is empty, it is possible to see waste on the floor. That waste
                     includes vegetables, cardboard boxes, plastic bags, and glass bottles. The
                     Trash Snail hovers over the road facing the waste on the ground. Underneath the
                     Trash Snail and closer to the container, we can see vestiges of urine on the
                     ground since there are no public toilets available in public spaces, as the
                     residents’ opinions on Maputo public spaces survey respondents also reported.
                     One can almost sense the smell of urine in the image. Behind the container, a
                     male figure can be seen looking inside the waste container. At the bottom of
                     the picture, a finger can be seen. 

                  The screenshot below (Figure 6) also depicts an empty waste container in a
                     residential area. The empty container is surrounded by waste on the ground,
                     including plastic bags, cardboard boxes, and glass bottles. In this screenshot,
                     the Trash Snail is facing the camera. We can see a pile of sand, waste, and
                     vestiges of urine behind the waste container to the left.

                  
                     Trash Snail placed at Rio Tembe Avenue, (Tendinha), Malanga,
                        Maputo.
                     
                     Image of an empty waste container surrounded by garbage. The trash
                        snail AR image floats in the air in front of the container, seemingly coming
                        right at the viewer.
                  

                  Figure 7 depicts the Trash Snail hovering close to one waste can occur in a
                     residential area at Zambia Avenue, Alto Maé, a neighbourhood close to
                     Malanga.

                  
                     Trash Snail placed at Zambia Avenue, Alto Maé, Maputo
                     
                     Image of an empty waste container from a private waste company
                        surrounded by garbage. The trash snail AR image floats in the air towards
                        the top of the container.
                  


                  The Trash Snail is facing the Ecolife logo with its mouth wide open. Eco-Life
                     is a private company responsible for public waste management in Maputo, which
                     was implemented after the municipality realised it could not manage waste in
                     the city. Next to the container, there is a small bundle of waste consisting of
                     food and plastic bags.

                  In this picture, different from other areas, the floor is cleaner, and not much
                     vestige of urine can be seen. That could be because the waste containers are in
                     residential areas that are often very well-policed and maintained instead of
                     places close to municipal markets with many dwellers and poorly lit.

                  The container in Figure 8 is at Commander Moura Bráz street in Malanga.

                  
                     Trash Snail placed at Commte. Moura Bráz street, Malanga, Maputo.
                     
                     Image of a waste container surrounded by garbage. The trash snail AR
                        image floats in the air in front of the container.
                  

                  In this picture, we can see the body of the Trash Snail hovering close to a
                     waste container. The Trash Snail’s head is out of the frame. We can see plastic
                     bags, clothes, cardboard boxes, and paper on the ground underneath the Trash
                     Snail. There is also an exercise book. It is impossible to tell whether the
                     container is full or empty; however, like other containers depicted above,
                     waste can be seen on the ground around the waste container.
               
            
         

            5. Discussion and conclusion
            This study sought to add to the incipient literature on AR and VR in Africa and
               explore how AR could enhance participants’ engagement with public spaces and solid
               waste issues in urban Maputo, Mozambique. The study was inspired by the previous
               research and projects in the field that showed that AR has the potential to enhance
               public engagement and transformation on different domains ; ; . However, to be able to reap those benefits one needs to carefully consider the
               material conditions in which the technology will be deployed. 
            After receiving around 57 responses from Maputo urban dwellers it was possible to
               note that one of the main issues that they faced was the poor management of solid
               waste that according to them resulted in their experienced negative perception of the
               city as well as the gaping divide between them and the municipality. To provide an
               outlet in which the participants could engage in showcasing their concerns, this
               study created the Trash Snail following the work of AR artists and scholars. That
               construction was inspired by the fact that AR was real-time
                  computationally mediated perception
               . In other words, it intervened both in the user and
               the public space by intermediating their interaction. 
            Much like previous studies and projects that employed AR, this study concludes that
               AR has the potential to enhance public participation in urban Maputo. The study
               participants’ engagement with the Augmented Reality showed that Maputo residents live
               with waste in public spaces. Much like The World Bank reported, some of that waste is
                  not managed in an environmentally [and socially] safe
                  manner
               . More importantly, it showed that AR could mobilise
               public participation in urban Maputo city despite the many technical and economic
               challenges that such an endeavor entails. Using Vuforia Engine to build the AR app
               required more recent mobile phones (android 7 onwards) to support the application,
               which in turn limited the number of participants because most used older mobile phone
               versions. 
            The study respondents that were able to deploy the AR using their mobile devices
               reported that it was useful to make them think about solid waste in Maputo. Moreover,
               the screenshots generated could easily be shared on social media. Their sentiment
               connected to Geroimenko’s idea that AR is ideal as a social tool
                  to generate conversations in and around the community. It is often experienced in
                  public space at the site of a problem, creating an opportunity to engage people in
                  conversation. AR can create experiences that make people laugh, cry, or think
                  deeply
               . This was also the case with the use of AR in
               education in which students reported that they felt that their learning experience
               was more fun and engaging . Those findings are consistent
               with the ones in other contexts beyond Africa that also suggest how AR has improved
               classroom experiences and learning process .

            
               Facebook post of the Trash Snail on my Facebook (Meta) stories.
               
               Facebook post of the image in Figure 4.
            

            Speaking about the possibility of AR enabling conversations beyond the immediate
               physical space, after posting one of the screenshots on a personal Facebook story,
               one of my Facebook friends asked me, how did I know about
                  the waste left in containers in public spaces? He then stated, it doesn’t matter how; the waste has to be removed whatever it
                  takes. The story had 141 views. The Trash Snail made those interactions
               possible. And more than individual experiences, those interactions could be shared
               with other people across space and time using new and traditional media . This experience connects to Ian Gwilt’s words, when he
               stated that AR enables us to switch between a personal and
                  shared experience of an artwork or urban space and to experience both digital and
                  analogue versions of the same environment
               . 
            The application has a screenshot and sharing button that enables the participants to
               share their experiences. The screenshots depicted empty and full waste containers
               surrounded by waste and urine on the ground, mostly close to municipal markets and
               non-residential and poorly unlit areas. The urine on the ground reflected that those
               public spaces in Maputo lacked public toilets, a situation that respondents to the
               residents’ opinions on Maputo public spaces survey also reported. 
            The study’s findings open room to creatively think the place of new technologies such
               as AR as being able to increase the much-needed participation of residents and actors
               on public matters. Similar findings were also presented in studies on education (; ). This means that the policymakers,
               scientists, and practitioners of AR should carefully consider the affordances of
               using AR to enhance public participation and deal with today’s severe challenges that
               cities and other contexts face. However, in the context of the global south certain
               limitations need to be considered. Those limitations include shortage of technical
               material, existence of old phone models that do not have the capacity to render AR
               experiences, the digital divide that characterise the country, poverty, and others.
               These findings open room to think about how the municipality itself could benefit
               from employing AR for urban governance and enhance citizens’ participation in public
               spaces in postcolonial Maputo. 
            The Trash Snail shows how AR could truly enable the empathy of the users and readers
               of the material by enabling the people to visually bear witness to challenges urban
               residents face in urban public spaces in postcolonial Maputo . AR emerges as a way of visually storying life in urban
               Maputo which opens the public space for multiple interpretations that challenge
               hegemonic modes of framing and visualizing the city. However, different from tourism
               examples, AR with the Trash Snail does not present a sanitized reality of space and
               the relationship between the viewer and the AR experience. Rather, the viewer is
               invited to visually engage with the issues of solid waste as matter out of place in which the discomfort, disgust, and other related
               sentiments are elicited in the user of the AR object. This differs significantly from
               the touristic sanitized modes of visually representing and engaging the public space
                  . 
            While the study successfully gathered Maputo residents’ concerns over public spaces,
               it was limited in that it could not bring the perspectives of the municipality.
               Beyond that, the study could not follow the study participants as they tracked waste
               in public spaces and deployed the app and, in the process, making evident the
               littered spaces and their knowledge of the city due to COVID-19 travel restrictions.
               The other limitation has to do with the fact that the study participants were not
               selected randomly, but through snowballing effect which could generate bias in the
               study. However, this study was able to show that despite existing structural
               challenges, AR can be deployed in cities like Maputo to enhance public participation
               on public issues.
         
