Title:  The Digital Environmental Humanities (DEH)
					in the Anthropocene: Challenges and Opportunities in an Era of Ecological
					Precarity
Volume:  017
Issue:  3
Date:  10 August 2023
Abstract:  
				Researchers in the complementary fields of the digital humanities and the
					environmental humanities have begun to collaborate under the auspices of
					the digital environmental humanities (DEH). The overarching
					aim of this emerging field is to leverage digital technologies in
					understanding and addressing the urgencies of the Anthropocene. Emphasizing
					DEH’s focus on natural and cultural vitality, this article begins with a
					historical overview of the field. Crafting an account of the field’s
					emergence, we argue that the present momentum toward DEH exhibits four
					broad thematic strains including perennial eco-archiving; Anthropocene
					narratives of loss; citizen ecohumanities; and human-plant-environment
					relations. Within each of the four areas, the article identifies how DEH
					ideas have been implemented in significant projects that engage with,
					envision, re-imagine, and devise communities for environmental action and
					transformation. We conclude with suggestions for further bolstering DEH by
					democratizing environmental knowledge through open, community-engaged
					methods.
			
Full Body Text: 

				Introduction
				A hand-colored lithograph from the mid-nineteenth century features the common
					brushtail possum (Trichosurus vulpecula), an Australian
					marsupial illustrated by artists H. C. Richter and Elizabeth Gould (see Figure 1). Naturalist John Gould included
					this illustration in his monumental three-volume compilation The Mammals of Australia (1863), the first major survey of Australian
					mammals, some of which have declined dramatically in number or become
					extinct since its publication. In also depicting what appears to be a small
					banksia, a kind of wildflower common throughout Australia, the image
					suggests the ecological interactions between the native marsupial and the
					endemic plant. An engrossing visual record of environmental history and
					interspecies relations, the illustration and many others are freely
					available through the Biodiversity Heritage Library . By collaboratively making biodiversity
							literature openly available to the world as part of a global
							biodiversity community, this open-access platform exemplifies the digital
					environmental humanities put into practice for engendering communities of
					action — in this instance, oriented toward biodiversity awareness and
					protection in Australia. While revealing early Anglo-European modes of
					visually representing Australian fauna, lithographs such as these today
					have the potential to catalyze ecological awareness and change, promote an
					appreciation of the country’s exceptional biodiversity, and serve as
					educational launching points for exploring the entangled histories of
					animals, plants, people, landscapes, ecologies, and technologies in
					Australia and elsewhere.
				
					Hand-colored lithograph of the common brushtail possum
							(Trichosurus vulpecula, formerly Phalangista
							rulpina) from The Mammals of
							Australia (1863) by John Gould (author) and H. C. Richter
						(artist). Image credit: Creative Commons Public Domain via Biodiversity Heritage Library and Wikimedia
						Commons.
					
					A colored lithographic image of a possum among ground
						cover.
				
				This article provides a broad, comprehensive overview of current developments
					and prospective paths in the digital environmental humanities
					(abbreviated as DEH throughout). It begins by calling attention to DEH’s
					focus on natural and cultural vitality — or what theorists of heritage term
							biocultural diversity — in an era of pervasive
					environmental decline. We turn retrospectively to a synopsis of the growth
					of DEH over the last decade as an integrative area of scholarship
					synthesizing the companionable aims of the digital and environmental
					humanities. Key theoretical and methodological elaborations of DEH — as
					well as recent developments in the field — will be delineated. Assembling a
					narrative of the field’s emergence, we argue that the current acceleration
					of DEH in response to the Anthropocene context reveals the following four
					broad thematic focal areas: 
						Perennial eco-archiving (through the work of the Long Now
							Foundation)
						Anthropocene narratives of loss (What is
								Missing?)
						Citizen ecohumanities (Atlas of Living
								Australia)
						Human-plant-environment relations (Native
								American Ethnobotany Archive)
					
				Within each area, we identify the ways in which DEH ideas and practices have
					been implemented in these especially illustrative projects that engage
					with, envision, re-imagine, and devise communities for environmental action
					and transformation. We conclude with recommendations for supporting and
					strengthening work in DEH by further democratizing biocultural knowledge
					via open, community-engaged, participatory approaches. Throughout the
					article, we view DEH as conceptualized within university contexts but
					extending beyond the academy to encompass the work of community
					organizations and concerned individuals. Furthermore, in selecting the four
					case studies above, we necessarily exclude related projects of relevance to
					DEH such as Anna L. Tsing and colleagues’ Feral Atlas:
						A More-Than-Human Anthropocene (2021), an archive of field reports from artists, humanists, and
					scientists on feral ecologies that continue to resist human control and
					have spread widely.
			

				DEH in the Anthropocene
				DEH encompasses diverse histories, theories, debates, practices, techniques,
					and projects internationally 
					
					
					. As a case in point, Figure 2 represents central Perth, Western
					Australia, illustrating how the area might have appeared in circa 1829, a
					year of intensive colonial activity during which James Stirling explored
					the Swan River and Charles Fremantle seized the area for the British Crown.
					In 2014, an interdisciplinary research team based at Edith Cowan University
					in Perth produced the visualization using GIS (Geographic Information
					System) and three-dimensional modelling techniques incorporating an array
					of source materials including Noongar (Aboriginal Australian) narratives,
					nineteenth-century Swan River Colony maps, aerial photography, European
					settlers’ accounts, artists’ impressions, literary representations, and
					geological and vegetation charts . Given its
					inclusion in a public exhibition on wetlands at Perth Town Hall in 2014,
					followed by a permanent digital presence on the state museum website , this reconstructed perspective of
					central Perth offers a graphic means to consider the city’s historical
					development and envisage opportunities to prevent the further loss of
					Perth’s extant wetlands. The Re-imagining Perth’s
						Wetlands project is an example of the multifaceted,
					multidisciplinary, community-focused, and often-participatory orientation
					of DEH through initiatives aiming to broaden public awareness of the
					interlinked cultural and ecological urgencies of the present. Work in DEH
					has the potential to energize political, social, and community
					transformations including, as this case demonstrates, the conservation of
					rapidly disappearing urban wetland environments. In contrast to landscape
					visualizations such as this, other initiatives use different methods
					including the archival conservation of biocultural heritage through
					open-access, participatory digital platforms (see, for instance, GeoHumanities 2018 and Herbaria 3.0).
				
					Reconstructed view of Perth circa 1829 looking west from the Claise
						Brook entry to the Swan River across the lakes of central Perth. Image
						credit: Edith
							Cowan University (2014).
					
					Perth, Australia as it might have been seen from above in
						1829.
				
				DEH responds to the exigencies of the Anthropocene. As a provisional unit of
					the Geological Time Scale — a system of chronological dating
					based on changes in geological strata over vast periods of time — the
					Anthropocene reflects profound and ongoing Earth
							System change. Mounting geophysical data
					differentiates the Anthropocene from its precursor, the Holocene, beginning
					roughly 11,650 years ago. Geochronologists locate the historical boundary
					between epochs in the Great Acceleration — the rapid upsurge in human
					population — and the first nuclear bomb detonations, both in the
					mid-twentieth century . The Anthropocene
							represents a major change in trajectory
							of the Earth system from the more or less stable conditions that
							have seen human civilization develop and expand over the past few
							thousand years. Nevertheless, the increasing circulation of the Anthropocene
					neologism has provoked proposals for alternative designations — from
					Capitalocene, Chthulucene, Homogenocene, and Myxocene to Plantationocene,
					Planthroposcene, Symbiocene, Thanatocene, and, even, Bandwaggonocene.
					Environmental historian Jason W. Moore (2017), for instance, advocates the term Capitalocene to
					acknowledge the vast networks of human and nonhuman labor exploited under
					global capitalism while Science and Technology Studies scholar Donna
					Haraway (2016) employs
						Chthulucene to foreground the ongoing multispecies stories and practices of becoming-with in
							times that remain at stake. What’s more, anthropologist
					Natasha Myers (2017) has proposed
						Planthroposcene as an
							aspirational episteme and way of doing life in which people come
							to recognize their profound interimplication with plants […] The
							Planthroposcene is a call to change the terms of encounter, to
							make allies with these green beingspp. 299–300. As these lexical
					confutations suggest, a pressing task of the environmental humanities has
					been the formulation of novel vocabularies sufficient to articulate the
					formidable effects of rapid ecological change on shared natural-cultural
					thriving.
			

				Key Developments in the Digital Environmental Humanities: 2011–2016
				In the Anthropocene context, DEH confronts global precarities of climate
					disruption, biodiversity loss, environmental injustice, Indigenous peoples’
					diminished land rights, and the weakening of biocultural knowledge networks
					in the wake of ecological degradation. With its approximately ten-year
					history, DEH remains an emergent — and, even, contingent — area of
					scholarship and activism that brings the technological and digital
					expertise of the digital humanities (DH) into dialogue with the ecological
					and biospheric concerns of the environmental humanities (EH). During the
					five-year period between 2011 and 2016, DEH made considerable progress
					toward integrating the digital and environmental spheres of interest
					represented by its constituent fields. In 2011, members of the Munich-based
					Rachel Carson Center began the Ant Spider Bee
					blog to engage academics and practitioners in
							exploration, discussion, and reflection about digital practices,
							methodologies, and applications in environmental humanities
							work.
					The blog’s third section Bee, for example,
					features short articles reflecting on current advances and outlining
					notable projects in the field. As astrophysicist Chris Lintott (2015) explains in his contribution to
						Bee, digital tools such as Zooniverse,
							the world’s largest and most popular
							platform for people-powered research, harness the considerable
					potential of citizen research across disciplines — from identifying
					endangered animals recorded in camera trap images to analyzing
					nineteenth-century mariners’ weather logs in order to comprehend climate
					change implications in the present.
				Alongside the Ant Spider Bee forum, one of the
					field’s earliest initiatives was the Digital Environmental Humanities
					Network, or DEHN. With funding from Canada’s Social Sciences and Humanities
					Research Council, the DEHN convened a pivotal workshop in September 2013 at
					McGill University to bring digital and the
							environmental humanities scholars together to showcase work that
							had already been done at the intersection of these two fields and
							to concretize the possible emergence of a new field. Consolidating
					interest in the DEH nexus, the workshop included digital humanists as well
					as scholars specializing in particular areas of the environmental
					humanities, namely, ecocriticism and environmental history. At the time of
					writing, although listed as a research cluster on the McGill University
					website, the network appears largely inactive, illustrating the broader
					challenges of sustaining DEH initiatives over time in the light of research
					funding contingencies and ongoing institutional privileging of disciplinary
					specialization 
					.
				Also in 2013, the editors of Environmental
						Humanities — the field’s premier journal published since 2012
					in an open-access format — in partnership with the Environmental and
					Society Portal at the Rachel Carson Center, issued a call for papers for a
					special issue The Digital / Environmental Humanities
						Nexus: Challenges and Opportunities
					. Although it appears to have never
					eventuated — or could have been diverted into other publications, projects,
					or forums — the issue promised to reflect on
							intersections between digital and environmental humanities from a
							variety of perspectives [as well as to] enrich understandings of
							the extent to which digital technologies and resources are
							informing current environmental humanities
							scholarship. In one of the first DEH-related articles published in Environmental Humanities, entitled The Armchair Traveler’s Guide to Digital Environmental
						Humanities (2014),
					environmental historian Finn Arne Jørgensen develops a persuasive argument
					for ongoing collaborative efforts between the history of technology, the
					environmental humanities, and the digital humanities.
				Between 2014 and 2016, DEH gained further standing as a focus of digital
					humanities conference presentations and special issues of academic
					journals. At the 2014 Digital Humanities Australasia (DHA) conference, for
					instance, environmental humanist (and an author of the current article)
					John C. Ryan presented FloraCultures: The Nature of a
						Biodiversity Archive for Plant-Based Cultural Heritage,
					characterizing the eco-digital
						humanities as a possibility. The
					presentation considered the use of digital archival technologies for the
					conservation of botanical — or plant-based — cultural heritage in Perth,
					Western Australia. A city of remarkable floristic diversity, Perth also
					faces formidable conservation challenges, including urban and suburban
					development in addition to the spread of native plant pathogens,
					exacerbated by climate precarities . As plants
					vanish, so do the irreplaceable heritage values associated with them. In
					advocating DEH as a response to botanical diversity loss, the presentation
					theorized environmental poiesis as the making of digital
					artifacts informed by ideas of environmental ethics, ecological justice,
					ecofeminism, sustainability, bioregionalism, biodiversity conservation, and
					multispecies thinking.
				Special issues on DEH in the literary criticism journals Green Letters
					 and PMLA
					 brought much-needed critical attention to
					the potential for dialogue between the digital and environmental
					humanities. Contributors to the PMLA issue
					addressed concepts from language ecology to digital affect in addition to
					projects from the Icelandic Saga Map to the
					online journal of Indigenous writing, Dawnland Voices
						2.0. During this period, as well, key conceptual analyses,
					notably Bethany Nowviskie’s Digital Humanities in the
						Anthropocene (2015),
					broadened the theoretical scope of the DEH debate. Nowviskie (2015) suggests that DEH orient toward
					the environmental and human implications of digital research — from the
					socio-political influence of device manufacturers to the carbon footprints
					of ostensibly low-impact digital projects. For Nowviskie and others, DEH
					entails addressing head-on the omnipresent urgencies of the Anthropocene,
					not the least of which is the widespread loss of nonhuman beings, species,
					and biodiverse ecosystems.
			

				Theoretical and Methodological Tenets: Technology, Story, Ecology,
					Temporality 
				As a whole, the major theoretical and methodological elaborations of DEH
					attempt to synthesize the strengths — while redressing limitations — of the
					digital and environmental humanities as discrete fields 
					
					
					
					
					
					
					
					
					
					
					. This section briefly addresses four areas
					of focus within current conceptualizations of DEH as an emergent,
					integrative, and transdisciplinary field of research and practice:
					technology, story, ecology, and temporality. The capacity of DEH to address
					these four deeply entangled areas — often simultaneously — demonstrates its
					potential in the present epoch.
				In an early elaboration of the field, Stephanie Posthumus and Stéfan Sinclair
						(2014) characterize DEH as
							a new and burgeoning area that still
							remains largely undefined, but that asserts the importance of the
							humanities in responding to the ecological crisis while
							leveraging new tools and technologiesp. 254. From their
					perspective, DEH brings the tools and methods of DH to bear on concerns
					within EH; conversely, EH’s planetary and political focus helps to
					elucidate aspects of digital tool-making and critique central to DH. For
					Posthumus and Sinclair (2014), EH
					promotes sustainable societal interactions with the natural world whereas
					DH has remained less critical of techno-scientific practices that carry the
					potential for ecological harm. In turn, DH problematizes what Posthumus and
					Sinclair identify as EH’s inherent bias against technocentric — and, even,
					technocratic — salves to social, cultural, linguistic, and environmental
					challenges. Moreover, DH’s long historical outlook on the emergence of
					technologies introduces critical considerations — the possibility of new interactions, new
							collaborations — to the environmental
					humanities whereas, complementarily, EH’s emphasis on telling the stories
					of the natural world can transform the making of digital archives, electronic editions and data
							visualisationsp. 269. Posthumus and
					Sinclair propose digital ecology as a concept that, by
					reconciling the entrenched binaries of hardware/software, computer/user,
					and real/virtual, discloses how digital environments facilitate novel
					interpretations of material environments, and vice versa.
				 Posthumus and Sinclair’s privileging of stories and storytelling aligns with
					Jørgensen’s (2014) assertion that DEH
					centers on new forms of storytelling and
							presentationp.
							110. Indeed, innovations in new media technologies
					facilitate the emergence of multi-dimensional stories about the relations
					between people, nonhumans, landscapes, and technologies. In his analysis of
					the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation’s slow travel series of
					digitally-enhanced television programs, Jørgensen (2014) argues that distant natures, those that are not
						experienced through the body but distributed through data and media,
						need different modes of analysis and storytelling (p. 109). At the same time,
					environmental humanists assert that biocultural values take shape through
					the stories individuals and communities tell about nature as well as the
					stories that nature tells about itself . As
					environmental historian Tom Griffiths (2007) explains in a seminal overview of the environmental
					humanities, The stories we live by determine the
							future. So, in harnessing the power of narrative, in listening
							to, rediscovering and generating true stories, we change the
							world. In
					similar terms, ecomusicologist Kate Galloway (2017) emphasizes the narrative possibilities of DEH for
					embracing the integral role of technology in comprehending and
					communicating ecological issues. Methods of aural-digital storytelling —
					audio-recorded soundwalks, multi-modal sound maps, and crowdsourcing
					techniques — expand audiences to comprise academics as well as community
					members grappling with the direct impacts of climate change, ecosystem
					degradation, and related urgencies. In particular, storytelling modes that
					incorporate the body and the multiple senses can engage the public more
					compellingly in environmental debates. For Galloway (2017), the creation of digital-narrative
					objects that circulate in an
						open-access format and often contain research materials contributed by
						a research collective constitutes an embodied, participatory
					process of social knowledge formation (p. 52).
				DEH introduces ecological concerns to DH and, reciprocally, digital concerns
					to EH through the analysis of human-technological impacts on the biosphere.
					Margaret Linley (2016) characterizes this
					recalibration as the ecological turn in the
							digital humanitiesp. 411. Having an environmental orientation that
					centralizes nature-culture-technology intersections, DEH encourages
							advocacy, engagement, action, and
							participation as well as an ethics of responsibility,
							sustainability, and conservation. Most crucially, DEH approaches
					ecology not as a metaphor, figuration, or abstraction but as a material
					certainty that shapes the lived experiences of humans and others. Echoing
					Posthumus and Sinclair’s elaboration of digital ecology, other
					scholars have proposed the term digital Anthropocene to
					signify the conjunction of the digital revolution, climate catastrophe, and
					social, political, and economic precarities . While developing digital and environmental competencies, DEH
					facilitates generative exchanges across the arts, humanities, social
					sciences, and sciences .
				Correspondingly, Sidney Dobrin’s (2014)
					theorization of digital environments calls into question the
					assumption that environmental crisis originates in technology and, more
					specifically, technological excess or technology-gone-astray. For Dobrin
						(2014), digital environments are
							themselves natures and environments in
							and with which humans and non-humans forge
							relationshipsp.
							205. As such, DEH presents a framework emphasising the role of the humanities in
							responding to ecological crisis while also embracing new
							technologies and tools. To be sure, recent theory and
					practice in DEH has grown along the three axes of technology, story, and
					ecology, particularly in relation to the growing urgency of climate
					disaster and ecosystem collapse. Open-access resources such as NASA’s
					Global Climate Change portal offer downloadable time-lapse visualizations,
					for instance, of ice mass loss in Greenland between 2002 and 2020 (see Figure 3). Similarly, the Smithsonian
					Institution National Museum of Natural History’s Eruptions, Earthquakes, and Emissions (E3) application
					presents a time-lapse visualization of 250,000 volcanic eruptions and
					earthquakes since 1960 . Originating in the
					sciences, these and other digital environments — to invoke Dobrin’s term —
					constitute invaluable storytelling platforms for EH-related research,
					pedagogy, and outreach in response to the Anthropocene.
				
					Visualization of Greenland ice mass loss 2002–2020. Image credit:
							Global Climate Change (NASA).
					
					A graph showing steady loss of ice mass in Greenland over
						time.
				
				In many ways, the ten-year evolution of the landmark collection Ant Spider Bee: Chronicling Digital Transformations in
						Environmental Humanities
					 parallels the development of DEH. The
					open-access book is the outcome of the eponymous blog begun in 2011
							to collect and reflect on ways
							technology was transforming the epistemologies, methods, and
							dissemination of environmental humanities research. Both the book
					and the blog demonstrate the ongoing interweaving of EH and DH theories and
					methods within the DEH nexus. Published by the Rachel Carson Center for
					Environment and Society — as noted, a leader in DEH globally — the
					collection comprises forty-two short, reflective chapters arranged in five
					sections: 
						Evolution
						Engagement: New Voices
						Mediations: New Forms
						Metamorphoses: New Natures
						An Experiment in Collecting and Curating
					The editors characterize the Ant Spider
						Bee initiative — from its origins as a blog to its present
					dissemination as a book — as an experiment in long-term collecting and
					curating. Cognizance of the longue durée and, by extension, deep
					temporality, underlies the project’s ethos of curation: As the use of digital technologies to gather and
							process knowledge becomes increasingly natural, we hope that
								this digital time capsule will offer insights
							about the past, for the future (emphasis added). As
					suggested in the following discussion of perennial eco-archiving and,
					specifically, the work of The Long Now
						Foundation, a deep temporal outlook is integral to the digital
					environmental humanities.
			

				Perennial Eco-Archiving: Deep Time Awareness and the Longue Durée of
					DEH
				Environmental humanists stress that understanding the implications of the
					Anthropocene for the future of life on Earth necessitates grappling with
					deep time as both a bewildering abstraction and an embodied immediacy . Representing Earth or geological history,
					deep time is a sense of time that registers in millionennia —
					millions of years — instead of millennia. In the Anthropocene context,
					paleobiologist Jan Zalasiewicz (2017)
					calls attention to a peculiarity of geological
							time, which is that, at heart, it is simply time — albeit
								in very large amountsp. 124
					(emphasis added). As a recent specialization within the environmental
					humanities, the paleoenvironmental humanities (or PEH) emphasizes the value
					of deep time narratives, ranging from hopeful stories of human-non-human
					resilience to tragic accounts of biocultural collapse. PEH responds to the
					urgency of engendering deep time awareness in the environmental humanities
					through empirical investigation of archaeological materials. The aim is
							to reframe the wider discourse on
							climate change in terms of our quickly expanding deep-time
							knowledge and to demonstrate that humans can neither be
							characterized as beings fundamentally divorced from
							nature. Considering the challenge of comprehending deep, geological
					time, the objectives of PEH are estimable. In Timefulness (2018), for
					example, geologist Marcia Bjornerud proposes the term
						chronophobia to signify the innate human aversion to deep
					time. For Bjornerud (2018), the perils
					of temporal illiteracyp. 7 are formidable. As an
					antidote to chronophobia, timefulness situates human culture
					in Earth history, promoting deep time consciousness.
				 Developed with respect to deep time, the idea of perennial
						eco-archiving refers to temporally-expansive,
						timeful archival work that preserves knowledge of
					language, society, and environment. Perennial archiving involves
					high-resolution data, archiving servers, and other long-term conservation
					techniques and technologies .
					Perennial eco-archiving, then, applies comparable digital strategies to
					curate, conserve, and disseminate nature-culture interconnections,
					especially as related to theories and practices of sustainability. As a
					case in point, the Digital Matters Lab at the University of Utah adopted a
					four-year focus on sustainability in order to contribute to current debates
					within the digital humanities while addressing ecological challenges
					particular to Utah including long-term drought, water rights, air quality,
					and access to public lands . The
					sustainability emphasis galvanized attention to issues of durability,
					temporality, and scale: Sustainability not only
							prompts us to think of the durability of digital projects, but
							also asks us to think differently about the timescales on
								which we usually consider technology; instead of
							thinking in processing times and milliseconds, sustainability
							might prompt us to consider the millennia that our e-waste
								takes to degrade (emphasis added). The theme
					invited researchers to interrogate ecological issues — that is, to think in
					terms of environmental sustainability — while also critically considering
					the longevity of digital-activist projects. As an example of DEH research
					concerned with the longue durée, the Digital Matters Lab project highlights
					the integrated digital-environmental inflections of the term
						conservation — that, rather than oppositional, digital
					and environmental conservation can go hand-in-hand. The digital
						environments resulting from DEH collaborations help to
					dismantle the longstanding division between the digital (disembodied,
					technological, abstract) and the ecological (corporeal, material,
					relational).
				 The timeful work of The Long Now
						Foundation concretizes the notion of perennial eco-archiving
					while highlighting some challenges surrounding the idea. The Foundation is
					a nonprofit dedicated to advancing long-term thinking at the scale of
					10,000 years . The organization’s
					temporally-ambitious work includes The Clock of the
						Long Now, a
						10,000 year monument to long-term thinking, and The Rosetta Project, a
							living archive of 1,500 human languages. The latter is a global collaboration of language specialists and
							native speakers working to build a publicly accessible digital
							[and post-digital] library of human languages. The Rosetta
						Project responds to the looming problem of digital
					obsolescence and the pressing need to devise new archival techniques with
					long purviews. Techno-linguistic innovations such as the Rosetta Disk
					address the likelihood that global language loss will triple within forty
					years, marked by the extinction of one language on average per month . To avert the catastrophic disappearance
					of nearly 1,500 languages by the century’s end, language documentation,
					multilingual education programs, and other community-based initiatives are
					required urgently . Toward this aim, the
					Rosetta Disk offers a post-digital solution. The three-inch diameter nickel
					disk encodes 14,000 pages of linguistic information microscopically on its
					surface. Rather than a digital encryption, however, each page constitutes
					an image, allowing the information to be retrieved through optical
					magnification. What’s more, the Rosetta Wearable Disk is a miniaturized
					version of the language archive, measuring merely two centimeters in
					diameter and designed to be worn comfortably on the human body — as an
					embodied, mobile repository of language, culture, and environment.
				The Rosetta Project illuminates the overlays
					between linguistic, cultural, and biological diversity. As global
					biological diversity decreases, linguistic and cultural diversity decline
					in response. This co-occurrence of linguistic and biological diversity
					underscores the importance of integrated, multidisciplinary strategies for
					conserving species, habitats, and languages concurrently . Understood in this context, environmental
					relations inhere within the project’s emphasis on traditional
						culture,
					cultural diversity, and cultural and linguistic diversity
					. Simply put, the project reminds us
					that culture and nature are intrinsically related rather than diametrically
					opposed. Another perennial eco-archiving initiative of The Long Now Foundation — one with a deep-time, post-digital
					orientation comparable to The Rosetta Project
					— is the Clock of the Long Now. Under construction inside a mountain in
					western Texas, the clock will keep time for the longue durée of the
					Anthropocene. With more than 3.5 million possible sonic combinations, the
					device will yield a unique chime each day for ten thousand years.
					Incorporating principles of longevity, maintainability, transparency,
					evolvability, and scalability, the clock problematizes the short-term
					thinking underlying the global environmental crisis . While foregrounding deep-time consciousness,
					the Clock of the Long Now — sequestered in the mountain area it has
					transformed materially through its construction — remains remote,
					inaccessible, and haunted by its own monumentalism. Although ambitious, the
					project appears to lack the participatory, community-minded focus that we
					see as essential to the digital — and, for that matter, post-digital —
					environmental humanities.
				Recognizing the geophysical implications of decisions, actions, and
					behaviors, the Anthropocene underscores the material-digital imbrications
					between human bodies, technological transformations, and ecological
					systems. Through its fostering of time-consciousness and temporal literacy,
					DEH imparts immediacy to the human/digital/planetary interface. Illustrated by the work of The Long Now Foundation, perennial eco-archiving,
					in particular, raises the crucial question, How
							does understanding the digital [and post-digital] contribution to
							environmental crisis relate to digitally [and post-digitally]
							understanding environmental crisis?. As eco-archives with very long
					temporal purviews, The Clock of the Long Now
					and The Rosetta Project draw attention to
					post/digital materialities. In other words, developed in digital
					environments, both projects anticipate post-digital urgencies of
					linguistic, cultural, and ecological loss. Weaving between the
					environmental and digital, these and other deep-time-oriented DEH platforms
					have the potential to inspire more sustainable
							behaviors. It is within this context that DEH also provides a vibrant basis
					for communicating Anthropocene narratives of loss, recovery, and hope
					especially through the engendering of affect.
			

				Anthropocene Narratives of Loss, Recovery, and Hope: Engendering Affect 
				Affect is a potent confluence of feelings, senses, and memories with the
					capacity to energize the Anthropocene narratives of DEH. Arguing for the
					significance of affect in the digital environmental humanities,
					ecohumanists such as Jennifer Ladino focus on the ways in which digital
					environments facilitate affective responses to biocultural loss. From
					Ladino’s (2018) standpoint, DEH enables us
					to reimagine how to represent, cope with, and
							deploy loss in the service of a more just present and perhaps
							even a livable futurep. 189. Employing multimodal and
					multisensory strategies to communicate Anthropocene precarities, DEH
					embraces the transformative potential of affect, understood as the powerful, visceral, pre- or even non-cognitive
							feelings that arise and are transmitted in both virtual and
							actual environments. Consider, for instance, the affective work of the Climate
					Stories Project (2023), an online
					platform for sharing firsthand accounts of climate change through oral
					histories. In contrast to this project’s predominant focus on human
					experience, one of the aims of DEH is to understand how digital objects and
					environments narrate other beings’ lives and, in doing so,
					nurture cross-species empathy .
				To be certain, Ladino’s ideas reflect the impact of the affective
						turn on the environmental humanities and cognate fields.
					Conceptualizations of affect in human geography, literary studies, social
					psychology, and other scholarly areas highlight the intercorporeal
					phenomenon of bodies being affected by — and reciprocally affecting — other
					bodies within ecological systems. Over the last twenty years, the field of
					critical affect studies has taken shape through the writings of Adam Frank,
					Brian Massumi, Eve Sedgwick, and other scholars. Interchangeable neither
					with emotion nor embodiment — but instead marked by the concurrence of both
					across time and space — affect has been described as modulated intensities and embodied capacities — phenomena that arise and circulate as
							intensities among assemblages. Informed by affect theory,
					critical environmental approaches to cultural texts, digital objects, and
					social formations come to address what Karen Barad (2007) terms intra-action or
							the mutual constitution of
								entangled agenciesp. 33 (italics original). For, as
					Bladow and Ladino (2018) further
					contend, bodies, human and nonhuman, are perhaps
							the most salient sites at which affect and ecocriticism come
							togetherp.
							3. The preceding theoretical points imply that
					affective digital environments similarly offer salient sites —
					narrative nexuses — to which human and nonhuman agents contribute entangled
							agencies.
				As Ladino (2018) observes, an affective
					framework is vital to understanding the What Is
						Missing? memorial as representative of DEH work that confronts
					biocultural loss while attending to the potential for ecological recovery
					and community hope. Envisioned by American landscape architect and sculptor
					Maya Lin — who in 1981 also designed the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in
					Washington D.C. — the project is a global memorial to the planet dedicated, in particular, to
					species affected by the sixth mass extinction in global geological history
						. Also known as the Holocene or
					Anthropocene extinction, the sixth mass extinction is marked by more
					frequent incidences of biological extermination within the context of rapid
					ecological loss accelerating since the nineteenth century. As a result of
					human activities, species extinction rates are much faster now in
					comparison to the normal background rates of the last ten million
					years with, for example, an estimated four-hundred vertebrate species
					becoming extinct over the last century .
					Understood as a digital platform for telling stories of extinction and
					recuperation, What Is Missing? is a nexus of
					objects (artworks, images, audio recordings, maps, cultural histories, and
					first-hand accounts) concerning animals, plants, birds, reptiles, and
					amphibians with imperiled futures. Users navigate the memorial according to
					the categories species,
					habitat, and anthro, where the latter facilitates exploration
					of the ecological successes and failures associated with particular
					cultures, regions, and places.
				As a case in point, What Is Missing? features a
					short narrative of Wood’s cycad (Encephalartos woodii), a
					plant species endemic to South Africa but which is presently extinct in the
					wild. Considered among the rarest plants in the world, the cycad exists ex
					situ in the form of clones of a male specimen collected from the wild in
					the early twentieth century. The memorial includes this intriguing
					biocultural history as a launching point for further delving into the
					cycad’s story: In 1895, a single clump of this
							cycad was discovered by John Medley Wood on the edge of a forest
							in South Africa. In 1903, Wood sent his deputy, James Wylie, to
							collect some of the smaller offsets for cultivation in the Durban
							Botanic Garden, where they survive to this day…It is not known
							what drove Wood’s cycad to extinction in the wild, or indeed if
							it ever was abundant.
					Accompanied by an image of the species from Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, the
					narrative of Wood’s cycad implicates colonialism in botanical extinctions
					globally . There is also the account of the
					Franklin tree (Franklinia alatamaha), native to the state of
					Georgia in the U.S. Although extinct since the early-nineteenth century,
					the tree is now cultivated ornamentally. An illustration from the
					late-eighteenth century by naturalist William Bartram visually links the
					decline of the Franklin tree, in part, to widespread colonial prospecting
					of plant species.
				Lin’s digital memorial entreats users to learn
							about what is being lost, what is being done to help, and what
							each one of us can do.
					Encouraging users to contribute personal memories of species, habitats, and
					places, the project exemplifies — at least in its ethos and design — a
					participatory digital environmental humanities. The Map of Memory, in
					particular, solicits contributions of individual stories, accounts, and
					anecdotes toward the ideal of assembling a
							collective memory of the planet. With an austere black-and-white design suggestive of
					mourning, grief, and other Anthropocene affects, Lin’s digital memorial
					elegizes the loss of more-than-human life while invigorating optimism for
					rescuing species on the brink of extinction. The project’s reach,
					nevertheless, remains limited by technical impediments, notably the beta
					version of the portal (at time of writing) with broken links and
					navigational glitches that impede narrative flow and disrupt users’
					engagement with the material. What’s more, much of the content originates
					in other open-access platforms, namely Wikimedia Commons, raising concerns
					about the memorial’s long-term viability within the larger digital
					ecosystem. As evident in other DEH initiatives (for instance, Herbaria 3.0), the project’s aim is
					impressive but ultimately shrouded by questions of durability, continuity,
					and usability. For the memorial to grow organically in response to the
					ongoing extinction crisis — in other words, to become a viable and enduring
					platform — What Is Missing? might aim to
					become part of a wider online-offline community concerned with extinction
					and devoted to environmental justice. Engaging the public as participants
					in — and contributors to — the digital environmental humanities is critical
					work, as seen in relation to citizen ecohumanism and the example of the
						Atlas of Living Australia.
			

				Citizen Ecohumanities: Crowdsourcing, Community Co-Production, and
					DEH
				According to a set of principles developed by the European Citizen Science
					Association in partnership with other international organizations, citizen
					science engages citizens
						in scientific endeavor that generates new knowledge or
						understanding and results in a
							genuine science outcome. Usually associated with
					astronomy, biology, ecology, public health, and allied fields, citizen
					science addresses immediate issues while facilitating public participation
					in research and policymaking .
					Interacting with communities as participants in research, citizen
					scientists often become emissaries of their fields, translating technical
					findings into public discourse and advocating for science’s transformative
					role in society. As a result, citizen science has become integral to open
					scholarship as a framework for disseminating research outcomes with minimal
					barriers to access and for engaging the public in scientific practices . In this regard, Muki Haklay
						(2018) distinguishes between
					micro-engagement and deep engagement, arguing that public participation
					should be recognized at multiple levels — from the occasional assistance of
					untrained volunteers to substantial, ongoing contributions by citizens with
					established expertise in the field (p. 61).
				In response to the steady growth of theory and practice in citizen science,
					the concept of citizen humanities has developed in recent
					years 
					
					
					. Citizen humanities entails
					citizen-inspired and citizen-engaged research in the humanities,
					particularly archaeology, history, and linguistics as well as
					interdisciplinary work that crosses between the arts, humanities, social
					sciences, and natural sciences . On-site
					and in digital environments, citizen humanists apply humanities methods
					including collecting, curating, interviewing, transcribing, and annotating
						
					. Expanding research
					capacity through a community orientation, citizen humanists play
							a crucial role in preserving and
							enriching cultural heritage. Mark Hedges and Stuart Dunn
						(2017) emphasize community
					co-production in the citizen humanities while, for Joni Adamson (2017), citizen-engaged projects
							complement what we mean by citizen
							science and contribute to the most important conversations about
							how to respond to global and local environmental
							changep.
							117. Integrating research and activism through
					crowd-sourcing and narrative techniques, DEH offers a timely framework for
					conducting citizen humanities by staging
							different kinds of stories, oscillating between scales, and
							involving diverse participants in unfolding and recording
							nonhuman phenomena.
				Building on principles of citizen science and citizen humanities,
						citizen ecohumanities denotes the engagement of the
					public — broadly, inclusively, and ecocentrically defined — in work that
					attempts to understand, document, and disseminate place-based knowledge of
					human-nature relations. Extending Barad’s (2007) idea of intra-action, we further
					conceptualize the public to include multispecies communities
					of human and other-than-human members contributing knowledge, expertise,
					and skills toward a specific research outcome. Community-engaged work in
					the citizen ecohumanities moves beyond a singular focus on building
					ecological awareness mentioned, for example, earlier in this article in
					reference to the Biodiversity Heritage Library. In Climate Change as Class War, as a case in point, Matthew T.
					Huber (2019) observes that the
					sustainability movement tends to elevate the value of public awareness in
					climate mitigation. In contrast to the dominant approach, Huber maintains
					that environmentalist discourse needs to foreground the material advantages
					of climate mitigation efforts. While DEH certainly engenders biocultural
					awareness, there also exist manifold opportunities to develop projects in
					the citizen ecohumanities with more immediate and tangible impacts on
					communities.
				An example of the citizen ecohumanities with a significant and ongoing
					crowdsourcing element is the Atlas of Living
						Australia, or ALA, hosted by the Commonwealth Scientific and
					Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO) as a
							collaborative, digital, open infrastructure that pulls together
							Australian biodiversity data from multiple sources, making it
							accessible and reusable. Regarded as Australia’s most comprehensive biodiversity
					database — and one of the world’s premier biodiversity data platforms — the
					ALA provides conservation information to federal, non-government,
					educational, and community organizations. Established in 2010 by the
					Australian Government’s National Collaborative Infrastructure Strategy, the
					ALA is an aggregated, open, Creative Commons-based infrastructure supplying
					data to over 80,000 researchers annually . In December 2021, the ALA held
					approximately 102 million records and 10,000 datasets on 111,000 species.
					Data includes taxonomic classification, geographical distribution, and
					conservation status as well as photographs, background information on
					natural history collections, traditional Aboriginal Australian ecological
					knowledge, and other diverse data categories . Broad in historical scope, the earliest
					data comes from the late 1600s while thousands of species distribution, or
					occurrence, records are contributed each day.
				According to the UN Biodiversity Convention, Australia is a megadiverse
					country with unusually high levels of species endemism resulting from
					millions of years of biogeographical isolation. With the majority of
					species endemic to the continent, native plants represent a significant
					portion of Australia’s megadiversity. The country’s outstanding
					biodiversity, however, remains increasingly vulnerable to climate
					variability, habitat degradation, invasive species, coastal pollution,
					population growth, and other factors . As
					biodiversity declines, its cultural, social, and community values also
					become endangered. Accordingly, environmental humanists for instance,  argue that biodiversity data also encodes
					humanistic data about species, such as Nuytsia floribunda, the
					Western Australia Christmas tree, a plant only found in the south-west
					corner of the state . As a case in point,
					vernacular plant names disclose botanical histories and shifting social
					perceptions of certain species over time. Anglo-European colonists, for
					example, applied the name cabbage tree to Nuytsia
						floribunda because of the strong, acrid, somewhat rotten smell
					emitted when the trunk was cut often during the process of clearing land
					for agriculture and settlement. In contrast, Wudjari Noongar (Aboriginal)
					nomenclature such as moodjaar inscribe longstanding cultural
					traditions centralizing the tree. Furthermore, scientific reports from all
					historical periods often include cultural accounts of human-environment
					relations, allowing users of biodiversity data archives such as ALA to
					grasp not only the science of species but also their ecohumanistic
					resonances in culture, society, history, politics, and Indigenous
					communities.
				As an illustration of citizen science with vast potential for citizen
					ecohumanism, the ALA collaborates with citizen groups such as Climate Watch
					as data procurement partners to identify current distribution patterns of
					Australian species. Climate Watch is a global, citizen science-based
					initiative focused on assessing the environmental effects of climate
					change. The open-access platform aims to empower
							policymakers, researchers, media, and other stakeholders with the
							open climate data, visualizations and resources they need to
							gather insights on national and global progress on climate
							change.
					In conjunction with well-established crowdsourcing platforms like Climate
					Watch, the ALA could develop a companionable focus on biocultural data
					about Australian species, thereby further empowering and inspiring
					communities to act on behalf of the environment and pursue environmental
					justice. A promising emphasis for the ALA to adopt is citizen ecohumanism,
					for instance, allowing users to contribute first-hand narrative accounts of
					Australian species comprising, among other things, memories of species’
					historical occurrences, affective responses to the decline of plants
					locally, references to artistic and literary depictions of animals, and
					Indigenous cultures’ knowledge of bushfoods. This heterogeneous biocultural
					information could be solicited, collated, and made available on a separate
					digital platform — a strategy developed by the Floracultures project in
					response to the open-access Florabase repository of scientific information
					about Western Australian plants . In this way, a
					complementary platform would facilitate the preservation of Australian
					biocultural data that might otherwise not be formally recorded during the
					procurement of occurrence records.
			

				Human-Plant-Environment Relations: Digital Stories from the Botanical
					Humanities
				The study of human-plant-environment relations historically has been the
					domain of ethnobotany. Leveraging social scientific methods in researching
					plants, the interdisciplinary field of ethnobotany examines the material
					and immaterial — physical and spiritual — interconnections between people
					and flora in places over time 
					. Since its emergence in the 1890s at the
					crossroads of botany and anthropology, ethnobotany has focused largely on
					the classification, uses, and perceptions of flora in traditional,
					preindustrial societies, especially Native America and Aboriginal
					Australia. Utilitarian in emphasis, ethnobotany empirically investigates
					the uses of plant species as foods, medicines, fibers, dyes, materials,
					ornaments, decorations, and totems. Alongside ethnobotany, over the last
					decade in particular, the field of human-plant studies — increasingly
					called the botanical
						humanities — has taken shape through the work of cultural
					theorists, philosophers, literary critics, ecologists, and biologists . Botanical humanists problematize dominant
					Western characterizations of plant life as the passive, sessile, and silent
					backdrop to human activities. Scholarship in this area addresses a range of
					ethical concern, from the social consequences of genetically manipulating
					seeds to the moral implications of plant sentience for mainstream
					agriculture.
				While clearly embedded in the ethnobotanical paradigm, the Native American Ethnobotany Database, or NAED,
					also exemplifies the digital environmental humanities — or what could even
					be called the digital botanical humanities — in practice well before the
					circulation of the term. Illustrating the values of durability and
					evolvability in open-access DEH, the project demonstrates the movement from
					analog to digital archival strategies for understanding
					human-plant-environment networks and making ethnobotanical knowledge
					broadly available. Released in the late 1990s in partnership with the
					University of Michigan-Dearborn, the online repository of Native American
					uses of plants currently contains around 45,000 data items related to 4,000
					plant species and 300 Native American cultures . Beginning in the mid-1970s,
					however, the database’s earliest components were developed using
					edge-punched index cards. In 1977, a print-based forerunner of the archive
					with about 5,000 items was converted to a database management platform
					known as Taxir and dubbed American Medical
						Ethnobotany: A Reference Dictionary. Developed over a decade
					with assistance from the National Endowment for the Humanities, the
					National Science Foundation, and UM-Dearborn, an expanded version named
					Medicinal Plants of Native America was released in 1986 by the Museum of
					Anthropology at UM. This iteration comprised roughly 18,000 items detailing
					the therapeutic uses of 2,000 plant species by 123 Native American
					cultures. In 1998, moreover, a book version of the database was published
					as Native American Ethnobotany
					. Then, in 2003, with the further support of
					the National Science Foundation, another update became available, linking
					species in NAED to the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s PLANTS Database and
					enabling users to access photos, distribution maps, conservation status,
					and other information . The database’s evolution
					since the 1970s points to the value of multidisciplinary exchange in DEH,
					for example, in the diverse funding bodies and supporting institutions that
					have made the project possible.
				By highlighting the relationships between North American plants and Native
					American cultures through an open-access medium, NAED can be understood as
					a precursor of the digital environmental humanities. The database features
					culturally-salient tree species such as the Pacific silver fir (Abies
						amabilis), the traditional uses of which were first documented
					by ethnobiologist Nancy Turner in the early 1970s. In total, NAED
					enumerates twenty-seven uses of A. amabilis by seven cultures.
					The Bella Coola people of British Columbia, for instance, applied Pacific
					silver fir as an eye medicine, gastrointestinal aid, throat aid, and
					tuberculosis remedy, whereas the Oweekeno used the tree as a medicine for
					colds. Each entry lists the scientific name, common name, plant family, use
					category, and use sub-category for each species along with notes such as
						liquid pitch
						mixed with mountain goat tallow and used for infected eyes in
					reference to the Bella Coola treatment of eye diseases with Pacific silver
					fir. As a research tool, NAED supplies complete bibliographic details for
					each entry’s source, guiding users seeking further ethnobotanical
					information about particular plants and cultures. By clicking the
					hyperlinked names Bella Coola and Oweekeno, moreover, users can access all species
					with recorded uses by these cultures.
				The case of the Native American Ethnobotany
						Database underscores the potential for DEH to engage with new
					technologies — including pre- and post-digital forms — an issue also raised
					in our discussion of perennial eco-archiving and the work of The Long Now Foundation. The platform Mukurtu, for instance, is a community-driven
					content management system that enables Indigenous communities to preserve
					and disseminate their digital heritage in keeping with cultural protocols.
					In response to worldwide movements toward decolonization and
					reconciliation, Mukurtu presents a dynamic
					digital environmental humanities tool for managing ethnobiological data and
					extending the ambit of longstanding databases such as NAED . Notwithstanding its accessibility,
					adaptability, and durability, NAED presents a non-participatory mode of
					telling stories about the botanical world. Furthermore, the project
					reinscribes the historical authority of ethnobotany as the foremost
					scholarly paradigm for understanding human-plant relations and,
					specifically, the culturally-sensitive botanical knowledge of Indigenous
					people. As a counter example, Herbarium 3.0
					offers a user-based platform for disseminating stories of plants, people,
					and places by pairing historical herbarium
							specimens with contemporary stories about plants to […] restore
							the layered histories of plant-human interactions. Reimagining the
					herbarium tradition of botanical science as interactive and open-ended,
						Herbaria 3.0 is a collaboration between
					plant biologists, environmental humanists, and researchers in science
					pedagogy designed to foreground the significance of vegetal life in an era
					of climate disturbance and species dislocation. As the organizers remark,
							these stories can draw our attention to
							the intertwined nature of human-plant relationships. Turning to
							these relationships helps us to remember plants and reconnect
							with them, acknowledging the pivotal role plants play in our
							lives. Toward this
					aim, narratives are organized into three categories: Story Garden,
					Stay-At-Home Stories (with a pandemic focus), and Root Stories. The Story
					Garden Map depicts the geographical distribution of stories, the majority
					of which are located in North America. The entry consulted, Musing from Under a Moss Leaf, dated June 17,
					2021, uses a specimen plate of the common hair moss (Polytrichum
						commune) from the Oxford University Herbarium as a starting
					point for meditating on the evolutionary and ecological importance of this
					diminutive species. Overall, however, Herbaria
						3.0 appears underpopulated — its potential not yet realized —
					calling attention to the critical issue of sustaining public participation
					in DEH initiatives over time.
			

				Conclusion: Bolstering the Digital Environmental Humanities
				The strains elaborated in this article — perennial eco-archiving,
					Anthropocene narratives of loss, citizen ecohumanities, and
					human-plant-environment relations — illustrate the range of work currently
					falling within the scope of the digital environmental humanities. Whereas
					projects such as Herbaria 3.0 and the Atlas of Living Australia engage members of the
					public centrally as knowledge-bearers and knowledge-contributors, The Clock of the Long Now, Native American Ethnobotany Database, and others largely
					preclude community participation. This section offers some recommendations
					for bolstering DEH’s critical capacity by democratizing biocultural
					knowledge via community-responsive, narratively-based, transdisciplinary
					strategies. In embracing diverse theories and practices, DEH brings
					decolonial, arts-based, and practice-led models into dialogue with
					qualitative and quantitative approaches.
				 One of DEH’s foremost aims should be to foster inclusive participation in
					open-access digital environments. This begins by generally recognizing the
					value of citizen ecohumanism and encourages the development of novel
					approaches to sustaining long-term community contributions. Possible
					strategies include integrating emerging and established social media
					platforms into projects; using DEH infrastructure as a basis for designing
					learning programs tailored to different educational levels, from
					undergraduate training to professional development; and creating on-site
					and virtual skill development workshops to facilitate content contributions
					to particular projects, for instance, through the writing of Anthropocene
					narratives, the collecting of biocultural data through interviews, or the
					analysis of historical documents using crowdsourced annotations. Harnessing
					data through ethnographic techniques, text mining, data visualization,
					geographic information systems, and other methods, environmental humanists
					— academic specialists and citizen ecohumanists alike — can open up
							new research questions, scales of
							analysis, visualizations, audiences, and means of
							interaction.
				 As the field progresses, DEH will need to examine the ethical implications
					of converting nature into data. In this context, Sean Cubitt characterizes
					the datafication of nature as the remaking of nature as data in which habitats and
					more-than-human beings are interpreted no longer as corporeal phenomena but
					as data representing those phenomena . Cubitt observes that, in order to become data, nature must be reduced
					to common arithmetical form. Indeed, datafication
					risks diminishing the material urgencies surrounding the preservation of
					species in their habitats. Nonetheless, in relation to DEH, Alenda Chang
					stresses that the environmental humanities has the potential to return
							the material world to often immaterial
							theories and histories of technology. The stronger emphasis on materiality
					afforded by DEH will enable practitioners to address issues such as the
					energy demands of digital activities, the disposal of electronic waste, and
					the transformation of embodied beings into datasets .
				DEH should also aim to engage diverse communities in various ways.
					Postcolonial advances in the digital humanities emphasize the telling of
					new stories in decolonized spaces allowing communities to share their own
					knowledge. For Roopika Risam (2019),
					postcolonial DH entails designing new workflows
							and building new archives, tools, databases, and other digital
							objects that actively resist reinscriptions of colonialism and
							neocolonialismp.
							4. Postcolonial DH, moreover, centralizes politically, ethically, and social justice-minded
							approaches to digital knowledge production. Extending postcolonial critique to
					DEH is crucial, as well, given the underrepresentation of Indigenous
					cultures and the Global South in the digital humanities 
					. These points become even more critical in light
					of projects like the Native American Ethnobotany
						Database and The Clock of the Long
						Now, disseminating the traditional knowledge of marginalized
					communities and incurring physical alterations to Indigenous peoples’
					lands, respectively.
				DEH might also strive to balance critiques of the techno-utopianism
					dominating current studies of environmental sustainability with the uptake
					of emerging technologies such as virtual and augmented reality, artificial
					intelligence, machine learning, and quantum computing. As DEH scholars have
					observed since that field’s inception over a decade ago, DH’s long
					historical perspective on new technologies is pertinent to EH. By extending
					humanities approaches to the ecological and technological issues of the
					Anthropocene, DEH contributes to contemporary debates about ecology, media,
					and technology while advocating for new ways of thinking about the
					humanities . DEH should thus maintain a
					critical stance on its adoption of interactive post/digital tools to
					research and communicate ecological concerns .
				Informed by the arts, humanities, social sciences, and natural sciences, DEH
					can become more inclusive and innovative. In broad agreement with other DEH
					theorists, Alenda Chang (2021) contends that
							an EH perspective could show digital
							humanists how to broaden the scope and stakes of their work while
							mitigating some of the oversights characteristic of technical
							solutions, in particular false abstraction from the physical
							world and the valorization of speed — whether of innovation,
							development, or deployment — over deliberationp. 379. Facilitating
					collaboration between academics, activists, artists, writers, community
					stakeholders, and knowledge-bearers, DEH offers an adaptable framework
					supporting more inclusive scholarship in which disciplinary interactions
					underlie innovation.
				As an inclusive scholarly-activist framework, DEH calls attention to
					ecological concerns at DH events, and, conversely, digital issues at EH
					events. This could entail establishing digital environmental humanities
					working groups or special interest groups within professional structures,
					including, for example, the Alliance of Digital Humanities Organizations
					(ADHO) and its Constituent Organizations. Equally, digital working groups
					within leading environmental humanities organizations such as the American
					Society for Environmental History and the Association for the Study of
					Literature and Environment would reinforce digital concerns and awareness
					throughout different areas of EH. Increasingly inclusive and activist in
					emphasis, DEH is well-positioned to continue to address Anthropocene
					urgencies while imagining possibilities for human and more-than-human
					flourishing.
			

				Acknowledgements
				John C. Ryan acknowledges funding from the Biodiverse Anthropocenes program,
					the University of Oulu, and Academy of Finland Profi6 336449.
			
