Title:  Manifesto: A Life on the Hyphen: Balancing
                    Identities as Librarians, Scholars, and Digital Practitioners
Volume:  013
Issue:  2
Date:  01 August 2019
Abstract:  
                
                The work of digital humanists and librarians is often invisible to the larger
                    communities in which they work, particularly in academia. This opinion essay by
                    three librarian-scholar-digital practitioners explores invisible work and life
                    on the hyphen — between the academy and the library and between the human and
                    the digital. In this essay, we illustrate how librarian-scholar-digital
                    practitioners can feel overworked and underappreciated, working in and with
                    multiple fields and communities who have different and sometimes competing
                    methodologies. Through two examples, we look at how living on the hyphen takes
                    its toll for librarian-scholar-digital practitioners. We end our essay by
                    detailing steps faculty and administration can take to help us solve the problem
                    and realize the promise of digital humanities.
            
Full Body Text: 
 We are full-time librarians, fully-fledged scholars and digital humanists. As such,
                we split our work between different yet often intersecting areas. We answer to the
                distinct professional worlds of the academy and the library, the human and the
                digital. Or, to borrow the phrase of scholar Gustavo Pérez Firmat, we live on the
                hyphen. As hyphenated scholars, much of our work is invisible to either (or both)
                professional worlds. 
Our situation is not unique. Many digital humanists constantly experience the
                difficulties of having to perform interdisciplinary work. As Bethany Nowviskie
                explains: In a field whose native interdisciplinarity verges on
                    inter-professionalism, full-time, long-term digital humanities staff already
                    struggle against the pressure to become jacks of all trades and masters of
                    none.
                 Similarly, in 2012, Matthew Kirschenbaum argued the
                term digital humanities as tactical because digital humanities emerges as a rare vector for jujitsu, simultaneously serving
                    to position the humanities at the very forefront of certain value-laden agendas
                    [...] while at the same time allowing for various forms of intra-institutional
                    mobility as new courses are approved, new colleagues are hired, new resources
                    are allotted, and old resources are reallocated.
                 As Roopika Risam notes more recently:
                    This is the promise of digital humanities: critical,
                    generous digital scholarship that has the potential to cross institutional
                    sectors; to overcome the divides between archive, library, university, and
                    museum; and create networked publics.
                 Our question is how to realize this
                    promise.
 In 2017, the Digital Library Federation launched a working group on labor in digital
                libraries, and in 2018 they released their research agenda in which they discuss
                research on digital library labor conditions and suggest projects for further
                research. Also in 2018, Christina Boyles, Anne Cong-Huyen, Carrie Johnston, Jim
                McGrath, and Amanda Phillips issued a call to make forms of
                    digital labor and the agents behind this labor more visible  in their article Precarious Labor and the Digital Humanities. We are answering that call
                by investigating the working conditions of those who live on the hyphen and work as
                invisible agents of digital labor. As this special issue of Digital Humanities Quarterly is also a call for action, we see an
                opportunity to discuss our experiences and hope they will lead to more recognition
                from our various communities, as well as spark ideas for improvement and inclusion
                in other DH communities. 
 We enjoy our hyphenated lives, and our ability to build bridges between and
                contribute to fields we love. But we also are tired, overworked and
                underappreciated, in large part because our split professional identities often fit
                us nowhere, marking a particular kind of intersection that warrants recognition. 

                At the Intersection of Overtaxed and Underevaluated
                Like many practitioners of digital humanities, we frequently find our services
                    and insights in high demand because of our combination of skills. We give guest
                    lectures via Skype and speak at other institutions, not just on our scholarly
                    output but also on librarianship, digital practice, and teaching. We provide
                    support ranging from consultation to project management on large-scale digital
                    humanities projects, and we advise colleagues on smaller digital projects, often
                    serving as both project managers and technicians. We also create our own digital
                    humanities projects based on our research and professional responsibilities.

                And yet, despite demands for these services and insights and consultations, we
                    are aware that many faculty do not position us as scholarly equals, and that we
                    are underserved by the outdated criteria used to evaluate our performance. Our
                    supervisors applaud our scholarship yet nonetheless struggle to view research as
                    a billable aspect of our roles and responsibilities, rather than an
                    extracurricular activity done outside of working hours. And they struggle to
                    justify our extracurricular activities according to the guidelines they use to
                    determine tenure and promotion. This makes the invisibility of our work as
                    consultants, technicians, and digital scholars more apparent.

                When we do receive credit for our digital research activities, faculty and
                    administrators may fail to understand that our work is necessarily separated
                    between subject-specific research and library research and must therefore be
                    weighted differently. At other times our involvement is neither explicitly
                    librarianship nor explicitly digital humanities scholarship, but still fulfills
                    essential work in the spaces between, causing some of our colleagues to consider
                    us second-class researchers because our work does not fit clearly within one
                    silo or discipline. Suzan Alteri, University of Florida’s Curator of the Baldwin
                    Library of Historical Literature, encountered this problem after receiving grant
                    funding to produce an online annotated bibliography. This digital research
                    project combined Alteri’s expertise in rare books, book history, and children’s
                    literature. While the bibliographic aspect of the project fell under her
                    professional responsibilities, the research required to compile the bibliography
                    and contextualize texts was largely ignored. Having to combine subject research
                    with librarianship makes being a librarian and a digital scholar a real
                    struggle. The invisibility of non-discrete research intensifies the difference
                    from invisible labor to expected presentation, making it acute.
            

                Splitting Professional Identities
                Living on the hyphen, we are constantly juggling positionings and identities.
                    When someone asks us what our research is about, we struggle to answer. Do we
                    detail all of the work we do: our research in library science, our area
                    specialty, and digital humanities? Or do we only detail research that will be
                    most relevant to the person with whom we are speaking?

                Dr. Hélène Huet, the University of Florida's European Studies Librarian, is a
                    digital humanist and a specialist in both book history and the French literary
                    movement known as Decadence. Thus, Huet is both a digital practitioner and a
                    digital humanities expert for the community in which she works. On a given day,
                    depending on whether she is talking to librarians, digital humanists, or French
                    and Francophone Studies scholars, she discusses a different area of her current
                    research. Her example highlights one of the issues we are facing. Indeed, while
                    we love our multi-faceted professional identities, we sometimes think we are
                    losing our identity, and that by participating across so many different fields,
                    we are alien to all of them.

                Living on the hyphen takes its toll, as we spread our inadequate research time
                    too thin or fail to adequately demonstrate the multi-faceted nature of our work
                    as scholars and professionals.
            

                Realizing the Promise
                Faculty and administration can take several positive steps toward realizing
                    Risam’s promise and helping us solve the problem.

                First, we must all take responsibility for making all aspects of our work visible
                    to others. Therefore, at your next conference presentation, please talk about
                    how you completed your digital humanities project, what tools you used, what
                    decisions you made, who your collaborators were, and how your community and
                    working conditions made it possible. Encourage other presenters to focus on the
                    methodological aspects of the collaboration, as well as the results. Open up
                    calls for papers to include not just scholarly and theoretical concerns, but
                    practical concerns as well. Encourage practitioners and scholars to see each
                    other as equals. This is a call for all of us to be generous, generative, and
                    inclusive.

                Second, departments and programs need to revise their tenure and promotion
                    standards to ensure that hyphenated scholars — individuals who increasingly
                    represent the norm within academia — are recognized for their work. This
                    requires reflecting on the origins of the term hyphenated, and is indicative of
                    a change to better support our colleagues of color and colleagues from different
                    cultural backgrounds who face additional demands from hyphenated identities and
                    systematic oppression.

                Finally, we all need to push for a cultural change that includes all people
                    involved in academic work thus making visible the invisible work of those on the
                    hyphen, including but not limited to librarians-scholars-digital practitioners.
                    Achieving this cultural change within and alongside other communities pushing
                    for recognition of labor conditions and labor communities only makes sense.
                    Alone, our work is rendered invisible, but working collectively towards changing
                    the daily practices of academia can make the full scope, impact, and import of
                    our work visible. In doing so, we might make visible understandings of work that
                    are appreciative, compassionate, and connected.
            
