Title:  Complex Modeling and You: A Review of 
Volume:  010
Issue:  4
Date:  22 November 2016
Abstract:  
                
                In Would be Worlds: How Simulation is Changing the Frontiers
                        of Science, John Casti lays out the history, methods and evolution
                    of simple and complex systems as they exist in the digital world of our
                    computers and manifest themselves in our daily lives. He does this through a
                    plethora of examples, ranging from football simulators to internal computer
                    warfare between lines of code. Casti presents a framework approach to creating
                    one’s own complex systems for research purposes, and enduringly fosters in his
                    reader an appreciation of the fundamentals: how such systems behave, what the
                    best practices are, and how best to think about complex systems.
            
Full Body Text: 
Complex Modeling and You: A Review of Would-Be Worlds
                by John L. Casti (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1997)
To escape the grip of computer modeling and its effect on daily life in the 21st century would be, in a word, difficult. In the media
                models show up in our weather forecasts, sports predictions, and political vote
                counts. The video game industry has exploded with simulation and management-type
                games, ranging from managing a football team over multiple seasons to running one’s
                own virtual farm. Even the behind-the-scenes models of traffic prediction for road
                engineering and marketing strategy for advertising have moved us, physically and
                metaphorically, to desired locations and products. For all their worth, however,
                many of these simulations are simple models, consisting of
                plugging numbers into a calculation or algorithm, not accounting for the preferences
                of each individual agent, how their choices affect those around them, and, more
                broadly, the system as a whole; we would call a model that aims at these more
                detailed interactions a complex system.
In Would-Be Worlds, John Casti examines the growth and
                application of such complex systems. He sets an initially broad
                goal: to give an account of the computer as a laboratory for
                    studying the informational structure of complex systems
                    ( Casti’s emphasis). This manifests in his
                assessment of modern computer technology, its ability to handle simple systems, and
                demonstration through examples of what this looks like. As the text proceeds, he
                further breaks his main purpose down into its component parts, namely how these
                worlds relate to their counterparts in reality, what purpose such models present to
                researchers, and, perhaps most anticipated by the reader, how to build such complex
                systems for themselves . While Casti leaves this
                more pragmatic final question for the last three pages, he uses the bulk of Would-Be Worlds to present his reader with a deep and
                functional understanding of what complex systems are, their history, and how they
                work on the most fundamental level. This allows the text to serve as more than just
                a simulation how-to guide; instead, it gives the patient reader the necessary
                background and analytic tools for assessing complex systems and implementing them,
                for whatever purpose, to their maximum efficiency.
 Casti’s structure is complicated to define, in that it neither presents a history of
                complex systems by going chronologically through their evolution, nor does he write
                thematically, tackling one aspect of systems at a time. Instead, Would-Be Worlds is designed to throw the reader into
                various systems, sometimes almost entirely unrelated to one another, and show one or
                two of their features, from which Casti can then draw relevant conclusions for the
                reader and then move on. This is accomplished almost exclusively through examples of
                simple – and, later, complex – systems, with the former making up the vast majority
                of the book. While some examples can seem superfluous or confusing at first glance,
                such as the relationship between Picasso and the fidelity of a system, Casti is
                playing the long-game, laying out terms and concepts that will be essential for
                later discussion. While these examples would greatly benefit from a more explicit
                tie-in to Casti’s main objectives, Casti, as I will discuss later, accomplishes a
                great deal more for his readers by using this particular structure of rolling examples
                and minimal guidance.
 With examples occupying such a prominent position in Would-Be
                    Worlds, they require a more thorough look into their effectiveness.
                Throughout, they are the main vehicle by which Casti leads his readers to the book’s
                end – he often leaves conclusions to the readers and moves right onto the next set
                of examples to demonstrate a new concept. This appears early on when Casti moves
                from a football simulator to a solar system model to basic mathematics all in the
                first fifteen pages. Similar fluctuations continue, appearing in discussions of
                computer science simulations such as Codewars  and the later, more brief section on complex systems (, as just two examples). Yet Casti leaves many questions
                unanswered: Where does subjectivity come into play when, in a football simulator,
                one must assign a hard number to a player’s ability to catch a ball? Does this come
                from his ratio of catches to drops? Is this number understood in the football world,
                but foreign to readers who have never watched a game? Questions like these arise
                throughout the text, but Casti chooses to single out the relevant information of a
                system, to extract its fundamental purpose as it relates to his demonstration, and
                move on. This can leave the reader guessing at his purpose at times, even when the
                writing and descriptions are brief and clear.
 Similar issues arise in his less scientific examples. Casti is reminiscent of Ceci n’est pas une pipe by René Magritte in discussing a
                bullseye painting, only to drop the discussion entirely by relegating these
                philosophical issues to a two-world sentence — 
                    Hard questions
                    
                 — before moving on. This can lead the reader to feel somewhat exasperated by
                so many unconcluded examples after a while. By my own notes, I noticed this fatigue
                around Chapter Three, in which Casti presents multiple examples that all point to
                his perhaps implicit conclusion that, sometimes, systems can surprise their
                operators with unexpected difficulties . His
                style lends itself to this torpor, with each new section being introduced by a
                demonstrative example rather than the author’s own guidelines for the topic to be
                addressed next. Each instance of example-making might leave the reader asking the
                question to what end? and one will not always find a
                sufficient answer.
 It is not until just before the end of Would-Be Worlds
                that Casti’s purpose begins to come to light. This opens up with his own admission
                that, after over 150 pages of text, he has yet to answer the reader’s foremost
                question: how do I create a complex world ? The
                more attentive reader will have also noticed that Casti includes no concessions, no
                counter-examples among the many positive ones throughout the book. Casti addresses
                this too, in dedicating a chapter to addressing the limits that both science and
                nature place on these systems – with each case of constraint harkening back to the
                examples given in previous chapters . One of
                the book’s final acts is to give the reader what they have sought since the
                Introduction: a tool with which anyone, even those who have no knowledge of computer
                science or coding, can create their own complex system . The reader thus becomes increasingly aware that Casti had these
                resources at hand, but chose to leave them until the end, placing cornucopia of
                examples and discussion questions – sometimes unanswered – in between the interested
                reader and the tool they most desire. As I will now show, however, this deliberate
                delay allows Casti to get his reader comfortable and informed about relevant issues
                before complicating them further.
A broader interpretation of the text shows why Casti might have set up Would-Be Worlds in this way. By allowing the examples’
                subject matter to range across the board, Casti can demonstrate every potential
                issue – and every best practice – one might face in designing a complex system. By
                doing this, I believe Casti creates a reader who is now not only interested in
                complex systems and has the means to create one, but who can understand them from
                their most basic levels and can now, since they have so many models to work from,
                think laterally rather than linearly about their own projects. He creates a
                touchstone to which all would-be world makers can return when the inevitable
                difficulties and roadblocks in the creative process occur.
 It is important to note that the preceding analysis is purely speculative on my
                part; Casti never explicitly states that this is his purpose in Would-Be Worlds. Nevertheless, the way in which he presents multiple
                genres of examples, beginning with the most foundational, basic, and historic,
                allows the reader to adequately approach his more high-minded, ethereal concepts
                (e.g. system fidelity, relativity, and bias) from multiple angles rather than from
                one set approach. His scheme is almost Socratic, leading the reader on these
                incremental steps toward a goal already worked out in his head, while allowing for
                the reader to question the efficacy of this goal at each step along the way by
                providing many ways to accomplish similar tasks.
More so, his ultimate question of What are complex
                    systems recalls the What is Digital
                    Humanities debate, which is to say that it is a question whose answer is
                most effectively given in the form of examples rather than in a one-line dictionary
                entry. Complex systems, like the Digital Humanities, are a set of processes with
                unrelated goals that are accomplished through common, related, and sometimes
                antithetical techniques; and the best way to understand and, ultimately, generate a
                system of one’s own is to see others in action, learn how they were made, and
                innovate accordingly. This is what Casti offers in Would-Be
                    Worlds through his numerous examples and minimal, though helpful,
                narrative voice.
 We have left only some final notes about Casti’s style in Would-Be Worlds. Though the book’s second title, how simulation is changing the frontiers of science, may strike the
                humanities-oriented reader as irrelevant to their own work, Casti is unexpectedly
                philosophical and even humanist throughout this text. In one particularly vivid
                example he illustrates the boundary between the real world and art by describing the
                absurdity of someone calling the police in the middle of Desdemona’s onstage murder
                    . This clear, relatable, hypothetic scenario
                is indicative of every one of Casti’s examples: they are concise, often no longer
                than two pages; broad in scope, from modern biology to ancient Greece; and, despite
                their technical complexity, accessible to a lay reader. They are also simply
                interesting, a refreshing break for a reader who might expect droning paragraphs of
                authorial lecturing about such specialized texts.
As mentioned before, the book is notably philosophical in its aims. The only pieces
                of pragmatic advice – something a reader might expect in a computer science-related
                book – are his criteria for assessing the suitability of a system , a list of system 
                    surprises
                    
                , and his final thoughts on creating a complex system for oneself . The others, after his examples, are his
                deeper questions about what such models can allow us to ask about the real world.
                Often these have no answer, as evidenced in his hard
                    questions comment mentioned above .
                But this initial frustration of receiving no help is alleviated by realizing that
                this is less indicative of a field that has no answers than it is an acknowledgement
                that complex systems require one to make one’s own complex choices, and the
                questions Casti asks are the guide to executing those choices more fully.
Overall, Would-Be Worlds is a thorough philosophical
                tract for the development of complex worlds, with a bit of state-of-the-field work
                thrown in. With the technical strength and speed of computers increasing
                exponentially every month or so, the 21st century
                researchers are more poised than ever before to model and explore complex systems.
                John Casti’s text lays out this position by showing how we got here, what
                developments are at play, and what questions remain to be answered. While it is, at
                times, distressingly indirect in approach, I believe Casti’s book fosters in the
                reader more organic, well-rounded means to creating a complex system for research,
                and still presents the most necessary components, albeit in the final pages. Would-Be Worlds should be held as an exemplum of how to
                combine good thinking with pragmatic results and, more broadly, scientific tools
                with a humanistic mindset – a fusion that will become more essential as growing,
                hybrid fields such as Digital Humanities become greater players in academic
                research.
