Title:  Methodological Nearness and the Question of
                    Computational Literature
Volume:  012
Issue:  2
Date:  3 July 2018
Abstract:  
                
                The rise of the use of computational methods in both the study and production of
                    literature poses questions about how to best read works of electronic literature
                    which engage a wider sphere of human context beyond the literary text itself.
                    Taking a cue from modes of distant reading that have taken
                    advantage of computational methods in order to pursue empirical and
                    sociologically-influenced readings of traditional textual corpora, the liminal
                    case of ambient literature is examined. As a form of
                    electronic literature developed out of the field of ubiquitous computing,
                    ambient literature presents a literature which is intimately connected to the
                    situation of the reader, offering a text whose meaning is both variable and
                    specific to the conditions of its engagement. Having confronted analogous issues
                    in other domains, traditions of research in human-computer interaction offer
                    methodological insight into how such works might be read. Developing an account
                    of how literary texts may be read from a distance through user studies, an
                    ethnomethodological analysis of the experience of these hybrid works of
                    electronic literature is advanced. By drawing connections between literary
                    studies and human-computer interaction, new methods which focus on the analysis
                    of the experience of multiple readers as they encounter works of electronic
                    literature establish opportunities for future research into the contextual,
                    embodied, and computational nature of literature today.
            
Full Body Text: 
Andrew Piper starts a recent article on the computational modeling of plots in modern
                novels by wondering aloud, 
                    What would it mean for a novel to turn us as we turn its
                        pages? How are we not simply moved, but transformed — turned around —
                        through the novel’s combination of gestural and affective
                        structures?
                    
                . In wondering this, he is pre-figuring his own argument linking the
                development of new computational methods for literary analysis to new forms of
                literary understanding, that the possibilities offered by computerization toward the
                re-imagination of the shape of literary works might influence our appreciation of
                what literature is. What I want to do in this article is to radicalize Piper’s
                assertion that 
                    technology impacts argument not solely through the new
                        truths it produces, but also in the ways it changes our affective
                        attachments to the texts that we read
                    
                . I want to do so by examining the entangled prospects for both literature and
                the analysis of literature as posed by the rapid uptake of computerization in both
                the analysis and, importantly, the production of new kinds of literary texts. What I
                want to propose is that the computational and algorithmic basis that is shared
                between distant reading and new forms of electronic literature instigates
                interlocking epistemic and methodological problematics for each. In each, there is a
                necessary re-appraisal of the critical distances at work, both as they are actively
                employed by readers, but also as they are afforded by the texts. 
As a recent focus section of an issue of PMLA
                 shows, there is a sustained interest in the diverse
                epistemic possibilities afforded by the collection of methods grouped under the
                banner of distant reading. While there is no specific
                definition of what distant reading means (even within Franco Moretti’s influential
                account, several distinct approaches are taken up), it can today be most identified
                with a range of approaches (such as network analysis, topic modeling, and word
                vectors, among many others) that examine literature or text in general according to
                both its meaningful and informational properties . As
                Ted Underwood details, the kinds of stereotypical algorithmic and computational
                approaches identified with distant reading are not just the result of the rise of
                computerization, but are undergirded by a longer and more deeply set connection to
                sociological approaches to the study of literature: what has been termed distant
                reading comes to support more than just a quantitative explanation of works, but
                comes to make possible a layered approach to the interpretation of literature, with
                analysis supported through a variety of secondary modes of reading 
                . The computerization of the study of literature that is
                linked to distant reading is less about foreclosing possibilities than opening the
                way for new kinds of readings drawn in from other traditions. 
At the same time, however, that advances in computational technique have made new
                modes of literary analysis viable in regard to a wider set of questions, they have
                also made possible new kinds of electronic literature which pose a series of
                challenges to these computational and algorithmic approaches. Such literary forms
                (ranging from transmedia branching narratives to locative literature) incorporate
                computational techniques which augment the physical form of the book and welcome a
                host of dynamic and extra-textual aspects into literature. These literatures, more
                than just sharing a computational foundation with advances in distant reading, also,
                like distant reading, explicitly invite a sociological accounting of their function.
                The case of ambient literature
                 — which utilizes techniques developed in the field of
                ubiquitous computing  in order to create explicit and
                dynamic links between the digital literary text and the lived context of the reader
                — offers an opportunity to examine the limits of both old and new approaches to
                literary analysis. As a liminal case, this loosely defined set of literary practices
                invites new methodological approaches which evoke new critical distantances for the
                study of literature and computerization. 
Using both distant reading and the challenges posed by something like ambient
                literature as a guide, this article argues that the developing influence of
                computerization necessitates a re-consideration of what reading can mean in the
                study of literature and that methods developed in HCI offer a model for what these
                new forms of reading might look like. In advancing an approached derived from the
                ethnomethodological analysis of computing, what is detailed here is an account of
                reading dynamic and conditional electronic texts through an analysis of how
                individual readers come to experience and make sense of the texts. In this way, this
                paper draws on the sociological foundations of distant reading and its sense of a
                mediated engagement with literature as a guide for helping to consider the
                contemporary entanglement between literature and computing. 

                The Case of the Unreadable Text
                In order to frame the methodological challenge raised by a computational
                    literature, let's quickly look at two distinct examples of works which might be
                    characteristic of ambient literature. The first is a work by Duncan Speakman,
                        It Must Have Been Dark By Then, which by using
                    a smartphone app, a pair of headphones, and a physical book, invites readers to
                    follow a path through the city that is partially of their own design, and
                    partially algorithmically constructed by the app. Through audio presented by the
                    application, readers hear stories about contemporary changes to the landscape
                    and are directed to read passages from the book which intersect with the stories
                    being told in the audio. The experience of the work comes in the way that
                    readers are encouraged to examine the world around them, tracing the resonances
                    that are instigated by the relationship between their particular surroundings
                    and the accounts of migration and landscapes altered by climate change and
                    shifting social organization. In this, the stable linguistic text of the work is
                    augmented by the arbitrary (yet still specific) surrounding within which each
                    individual reader is algorithmically guided by the application. As the
                    implications of the work rely on the particular confluence of the stable text
                    with the specific surroundings of the reader, there is never a possibility for a
                    single canonical reading of the text, only for the specific and particular
                    encounter of any given reader. Each reader’s own location within a wider
                    geographical terrain of human infrastructures has a bearing on the text of the
                    work.
                The second example to be discussed here inverts this relationship between the
                    stability of the text and the algorithmic exchange with the situation of the
                    reader. Based in a smartphone’s mobile browser, Kate Pullinger’s Breathe is an online work that presents a reader with
                    a narrative text that is dynamically altered based on when and where the work is
                    read. The conditional text of the narrative changes with each reading, depending
                    where the reader is, the time of day, the season, and so on. Developed in
                    partnership with Google’s Creative Lab in Sydney, the work relies on a number of
                    different APIs to draw information from a range of databases into the work,
                    based on the context of the reader. As time passes, databases are updated with
                    new information, or the reader changes location, the text of the work is
                    altered. It presents a literary text that is bound up with the living conditions
                    of the socio-technical networks within which the reader is enmeshed. 
                Both of these works, each in their own way, presents a kind of text that is
                        unreadable to the literary critic. No one person is
                    ever given access to all the versions of the text, nor does there necessarily
                    exist some account of all the possibilities. They are not just algorithmically
                    unavailable, as in the case of combinatorial works like Raymond Queneau’s Cent mille milliards de poèmes which presents a text
                    which, for practical purposes, is infinite, but these are works
                    which are physically unavailable, with the imagined reader never having access
                    to the possibility of the range of variance of the text. On the one hand,
                    Speakman’s work opens the text of the work up to whatever
                    surroundings are offered by the location of the reader, welcoming the physical
                    infrastructure of the world to be included in the reader’s experience, whatever
                    that infrastructure might be. On the other hand, Pullinger’s Breathe, in its reconfiguration of the text proper
                    based the location, time, and day of reading, presents an almost infinite number
                    of possible readings, each linked to the specific conditions of the reader. In
                    each case, the work itself comes as a compound of the authorial text, the
                    presence and situation of the reader, and the kind of algorithmic work which
                    mediates between them. For It Must Have Been Dark By
                        Then, the situation of the reader is defined by their physical
                    presence with their movements through space guided by the application, while in
                        Breathe, this situation is derived as the piece
                    pulls information from databases to complete the work. These are texts that, in
                    their algorithmic adaptation to the particular and specific conditions of the
                    reader, resist an authoritative reading, computationally assisted or otherwise.
                
            

                Reading Computerization 
                As evidenced by the case of ambient literature, the forms of the works we read,
                    and how we read them, have been changed by the possibilities offered by
                    computerization. This totalizing view of the computational turn in literature in
                    the 21st century is one put forward by N. Katherine Hayles who writes that 
                        literature in the twenty-first century is
                            computational. . . . almost all print books are digital files before
                            they become books; this is the form in which they are composed, edited,
                            compos­ited, and sent to the computerized machines that produce them as
                            books
                        
                    . There is almost no literature produced today that is not implicated by
                    computerization.
                Further to this, the analytic challenges of the rise of computational methods for
                    the work of literary analysis are not just for those working with specifically
                    computational methods in the digital humanities. The influence of computing goes
                    beyond the practical consideration of how books are made and has come to inflect
                    every aspect of literary research. As J. Hillis Miller has put it: 
                        The whole minute to minute process of my professional
                            life as a student of literature has been utterly changed by the computer
                            in a few short years
                        
                    . In saying this, he is referring to the everyday availability of email,
                    word processing, electronic documents, databases, and so forth — changes that
                    coincide with and helped to spur the explosion of interest in the digital
                    humanities. As Hoyt Long and Richard Jean So note (echoing ) regarding the prevalence of the invisible
                    algorithmic substrata of academic work: 
                        Each time we enter a search term into Google Books or
                            some other digitized corpus, we are interacting with these
                            algorithms
                        
                    .
                For literary studies, the rise of distant reading presents one prominent
                    expression of the ubiquity of computerization. Closely identified with the work
                    of Franco Moretti , distant reading is focused on
                    the experimental Underwood makes the point that, as much as the work of
                        distant reading might still differ from other empirical sciences, 
                            the best distant readers do in practice approach
                                their projects as experiments. (We don’t wander around aimlessly
                                counting things.) But the experimental structure of our research is
                                not always foregrounded when we write it up for publication. An
                                article organized in social­ scientific fashion (methods, then
                                results, then conclusions) might not be warmly received by an
                                audience of literary critics who are used to rhetorical panache. It
                                can be more effective to pretend that your work grew in a casually
                                discursive, thesis­ driven way, and then happened to be illustrated
                                with some scatterplots you had lying around
                            
                        .  analysis of most often large and generally quantitative sets
                    of data derived from various corpora or individual texts. It is important to
                    keep in mind that, as Andrew Goldstone has pointed out, while it may today be
                    usually taken to refer to a computational approach, Moretti initially described
                    distant reading as making use of 
                        a patchwork of other people’s research, without a
                            single direct textual reading
                        
                    . 
                As much as it has been helped by the rise of computational methods, distant
                    reading is not synonymous with the digital humanities. As Underwood argues , the origins of distant reading can be traced to
                    an era of pre-digital research, with a line able to be drawn from Janice
                    Radway’s  sociological study of the actual experience
                    of readers of romance novels to the present computationally-enabled methods. For
                    Underwood, what serves to undergird distant reading is its commitment to
                    analytic techniques developed out of quantitative sociology more than the
                    digital humanities (or as it was previously known, humanities
                        computing). In this, more than an appeal to any kind of
                    computational underpinning, distant reading puts forward a call for a
                        scientific and evidence-based analysis of literature
                    such as was and still often is the aim of sociology. As Bruno Latour
                        points out: 
                            Sociology has been obsessed by the goal of becoming
                                a quantitative science. Yet it has never been able to reach this
                                goal because of what it has defined as being quantifiable within the
                                social domain
                            
                        . As will be developed, it is perhaps even more appropriate to attempt
                        to move away from the quantitative social sciences and adopt other
                        sociological methods as there is in literary analysis often an effort to
                        understand questions of the occurrence of meaning which stand beyond easy
                        quantification. 
                
                Whatever the final methodological outcome for distant reading as it is applied to
                    various new kinds of literature might be, what is clear is the end result of
                    such methods is an empirical one. As Moretti put it in a response to Geoffrey
                    Winthrop-Young’s  review of some of his
                    earlier, pre-distant reading works: 
                        ‘Possible’ does not mean ‘probable,’ or ‘actual’: here,
                            too, empirical research must have the last word
                        
                    . That is, distant reading is concerned with the facts of what is actually
                    there, a concern highlighted by Moretti’s  attention
                    to the importance of being able to plumb what Margaret Cohen  termed the great unread body of
                    literature that remains untouched by literary analysis. 
                In this way, despite following Lawrence Rainey’s dictum, 
                        the best reading of a work may, on some occasions, be
                            one that does not read it at all
                        
                    , distant reading actually has much in common with the New Critical close
                    reading which sought to analyze only the evidence from the text itself. Each
                    have an affinity for the analysis of only that which is actually present in a
                    text and eschew the inclusion of exterior facts as part of the central claims of
                    their respective empirical efforts . The claims of
                    computational veins of distant reading rest on empirical evidence from the text
                    itself that may be 
                        transformed from the continuous flow of our everyday
                            reality into a grid of numbers that can be stored as a representation of
                            reality which can then be manipulated using algorithms
                        
                    . With the quantization of the literary object into discrete units able to
                    be managed as part of an information processing system , for distant reading, the literary text is able to be treated as a document
                    (or collection of documents)  to be analyzed according
                    to any number of varying schema which often include characteristics of both
                    close and distant reading . The work of
                    computational analysis becomes the evidential framework from which the analysis
                    of literature works. As Ryan Heuser puts it in a discussion of the use of
                    word-vectors in literary research: 
                        word vectors provide the close reader with a framework,
                            language, and method of exploring the semantic implications at work in
                            an analogy
                        
                    . As Paul Fleming puts it in describing the computational study of
                    literature: 
                        In this combined method, one approach does not serve as
                            the check for the other, quasi confirming or denying its results (as the
                            instance of final validity); rather, they recursively refine and hone
                            each other, as in the return to one approach offers insights that, in
                            turn, modify the other
                        
                    . 
            

                Reading the (Post)digital
                This recursive transformation of reading in light of computerization is not only
                    instigated by methodological development. Just as computerization has
                    popularized new methods of literary analysis, so too has it made new types of
                    literature possible which in turn require new methodological approaches . 
                While the whole of electronic literature is far too vast and heterogeneous to
                    serve as a platform from which any kind of methodological claim may be made
                    here, I want to put forward the example ambient literature
                     and use this developing form as a means to highlight
                    the connection between literary studies and methods developed in human-computer
                    interaction as they invoke a kind of distant reading. What makes any discussion
                    of a general sense of electronic literature even more difficult is that what
                    might be considered the founding and most concise definition of electronic
                    literature that it is that which is 
                        digital born
                        
                     conflicts (as noted above) with the idea that almost all literary works
                    today have their start in electronic form, composed on a word processor. 
                This apparent definitional contradiction leads the way toward what has been
                    termed the post-digital. While its status as a loose
                    periodization discourages a specific account of its features, it is enough to
                    say that in the ubiquity of digital means of production, the push toward the
                    digital turns back on itself, encouraging an aestheticization of media which
                    exceeds the kind of discrete and quantized ordering on which digital works rely,
                    while at the same time relying on digital tools in order to both create and
                    offer a counterpoint to such non-digital works .
                    Without using the term, this is something discussed by Hayles, analyzing
                    Jonathan Safran Foer’s Tree of Codes as an example
                    of the ways in which the kinds of embodiment on which such post-digital works
                    often rely confound both close and distant readings .
                    In this, these works resist a traditional close reading of the text as their
                    effects extend beyond the linguistic content of the text, an experiential aspect
                    of the work that likewise resists the kind of quantization necessary for much
                    distant reading (of the computational sort). 
                This kind of textual embodiment and blurring of the lines between
                        reading and experience is
                    highlighted in the conceptual formulation of ambient literature. First described
                    by Jon Dovey in a volume on the cultural developments stemming from the rise of
                    ubiquitous computing, ambient literature is a hybrid form of electronic
                    literature, merging hypertext fiction, interactive fiction, and locative
                    narratives, among other forms . It builds on these
                    forms in order to integrate a dynamic sense of a reader's context into the
                    experience of reading the work through computational techniques established in
                    ubiquitous computing.
                Proposed by Mark Weiser, ubiquitous computing (ubicomp) projects a proximate
                    future in which computing takes place all around us, quietly functioning in the
                    background in order to help us in our daily lives .
                    Alternatively termed ambient intelligence or
                        pervasive computing, ubicomp offers a vision of the
                    computational world in which mundane tasks are relegated to the background of
                    experience, allowing human actors to engage in important, creative, and
                    enjoyable activities without having to be interrupted by the complexities of
                    computer interfaces. This utopian vision of ubiquitous computing was not
                        without critique or comment. For instance 
                        details the economic, privacy, surveillance, and ethical implications of
                        ubiquitous computing,  question the ultimate
                        achievability of what was taken to be Weiser’s initial vision for ubicomp,
                        and  question the hermeneutic-phenomenological
                        framing on which much research into ubicomp has relied.  It is
                    computing that is woven into the fabric of human activity and social
                    existence.
                Expanding the concept of a contextual literature which responds and engages with
                    the situation of the reader beyond a locational or immediate sense of context,
                    works of ambient literature take advantage of the information communication
                    networks which complement 
                        human traffic and the flow of goods in and around our
                            cities. These systems are large scale, city wide, national, and global;
                            they are dynamic, responding to what people do; they integrate embodied
                            and imaginary experiences, material, and mediating objects. In short,
                            they begin to become complex systems, which increase our opportunities
                            for new forms of reading and listening experience
                        
                    . In this appeal to a literature that is placed within a living
                    sociological context as part of the source for its effectiveness, ambient
                    literature can be distinguished from other, less embedded forms of locational
                    media or art, such as much of the work of artists like Janet Cardiff and George
                    Bures Miller, which engages the immediate context of the audience, without
                    drawing networked connections to a wider sphere of social action, data, and
                    infrastructure. This is a distinction that holds for other examples of alternate
                    reality or mixed reality works as well. While a work like Erik Loyer's
                        similarly app-based Strange Rain effects a
                        certain kind of literary ambience, merging text with an interactive
                        environment, it does not connect readers to the really-existing emergent and
                        networked context of the reader. Again, it is this explicit focus on the
                        interweaving of these works into large sociological networks that
                        distinguish works of ambient literature from other kinds of situated and
                        even embodied textual interactions, as in the case of Romy Achituv and
                        Camille Utterback's Text Rain in which readers
                        interact with a projection screen on which they can catch text as it falls.
                        There, there is a distinctly embodied interaction with a text, but not in a
                        way which (explicitly) engages these wider networks of social and cultural
                        networks of support. Even something as textual and situated such as Caitlin
                        Fisher's augmented reality work Circle, as it
                        presents an augmented reality overlay across a prepared terrain, offers a
                        good study in contrast to works of ambient literature which, at their best,
                        do not just peg texts to a situated terrain, but instead involve the terrain
                        within the text.
                
                What is important for considering ambient literature within the frame of the
                    post-digital that bridges between electronic literature proper and the wider
                    world is that, as Dovey puts it, it examines 
                        what might happen when data aspires to literary form.
                            It asks how can situated literary experiences delivered through
                            pervasive media systems produce moments where the individual reader or
                            listener is repositioned and offered new ways to experience and
                            understand their moment within the complexity of the urban informatic
                            flow?
                        
                    . In this way, ambient literature offers the literary analog to distant
                    reading: it is not an informationally-grounded analysis of literature, but an
                    informationally-grounded literature. In its concern for the literary uses
                        of information, this ubiquitous version of ambient literature shares a
                        common theoretical (though not historical) basis with the ambient
                            literature of authors such as Tan Lin or Sam Riviere who
                        explore the ways in which informational objects may be restructured into
                        traditional (non-electronic) works. Just as distant reading might
                    build upon a foundation of information processing, but still rely on the
                    scholarly work of interpretation, David Blei puts this directly in his
                        explication of the use of topic modeling for the study of literature: 
                            the statistical models are meant to help interpret
                                and understand texts; it is still the scholar’s job to do the actual
                                interpreting and understanding.
                            
                         works of ambient literature build on this informational
                    setting while still remaining firmly and primarily textual (as distinguished
                    from games, which are not primarily textual As Espen
                        Aarseth puts it: 
                            Games are not 'textual' or at least not primarily
                                textual. . . . We might say that the rules of chess constitute its
                                'text,' but there is no recitation of the rules during gameplay, so
                                that would reduce the textuality of chess to a subtextuality or a
                                paratextuality. A central 'text' does not exist — merely
                                context.
                            
                         Of course, as works of ambient literature look to explicitly invoke
                        the reader’s context as part of the work, Aarseth’s analysis of games seems
                        to circle back to a primary concern of works of ambient literature, without
                        setting up an exact isomorphism between the two categories. Works of ambient
                        literature remain equally concerned with both text and
                            context.). That is, as much as they are
                    activated by the presence and context of the reader as they read the works as
                    part of a wider socio-technical field, Alan Kirby provides an account of
                        the implications of this kind of literature in his conception of
                            digimodernism. Distancing the importance of this
                        kind of active involvement with a text from a poststructuralist or
                        metaphorical account of the co-production of meaning, he says that, 
                            the digimodernist text in its pure form is made up
                                to a varying degree by the reader or viewer or textual consumer.
                                This figure becomes authorial in this sense: s/he makes text where
                                none existed before. It isn’t that his/her reading is of a kind to
                                suggest meanings; there is no metaphor here. In an act distinct from
                                their act of reading or viewing, such a reader or viewer gives to
                                the world textual content or shapes the development and progress of
                                a text in visible form. This content is tangible; the act is
                                physical
                            
                        . these works rely on the literary text in order to evoke the
                    reader’s entanglement within this field. 
                As Hayles puts it: 
                        When a literary work interrogates the inscription
                            technology that produces it, it mobilizes reflexive loops between its
                            imaginative world and the material apparatus embodying that creation as
                            a physical presence
                        
                    . For works of ambient literature, more than just leveraging inscription
                    technology toward highlighting the circulation between ideas and physical
                    presence, this material apparatus of the work comes to be
                    the wider world of contemporary society and its informational
                    infrastructures.
                As much as works of ambient literature might be identified according to such
                    material apparatuses, and as such might be seen to be prime candidates for a
                    kind of ludological analysis, works of ambient literature, unlike games, do not 
                        require us to actively manipulate their
                            components
                        
                     (paraphrasing Aarseth), with these works instead being configured by the
                    context in which they are engaged. While there is a baseline level of
                    interaction in works like Breathe or It Must Have Been Dark By Then, the experience is
                    shifted by the situation of the reader more so than any active
                        interaction. While there have been arguments made for a more inclusive
                        sense of ludological analysis which includes social forms and not simply the
                        immediate materials of the games themselves ,
                        such approaches have only been applied specifically to games themselves and
                        the social construction of game specific concepts such as game worlds and
                        rules.
                
                While it is possible for the features and characteristics of the text of works of
                    ambient literature to be enumerated as part of a critical analysis, or
                    individual reports of an individual experience might highlight an example of how
                    a work may play out as in traditions of ludology, there remains a challenge as
                    to how it is possible to begin to approach anything like an empirical analysis
                    of these works as a whole as they come to include the experience of the reader
                    in them. At the heart of this problem lies ambient literature’s status as a kind
                    of 
                        writing for probability
                        
                     that 
                        depends on ambiguity
                        
                    . The vast field of situated context which a work of ambient literature
                    might potentially encounter (and thusly incorporate into its meaning) leaves a
                    wide berth open to multiple interpretations. 
                These are works which share what Rita Raley identifies as the 
                        reiterable practice
                        
                     of works which rely on interactive text displays, populated by
                    contributions to the text via SMS by passing readers. Like this form of
                        TXTual practice, it can be possible to conceptualize
                    ambient literature as works which are performed in different times and
                        places and 
                        might share the same structure, but they would not have
                            the same content in the sense that external forces would shape each
                            event differently
                        
                    . However, unlike what Raley describes as TXTual practice, works of
                    ambient literature rely on the building of tacit communities of
                    practice in order to shape the content of the work (through databases or the
                    physical infrastructure of an environment), instead of the more directly
                    evidenced micro-communities at work in the co-construction
                    of digitally-mediated public texts. Here, a work like Blast Theory’s
                            Rider Spoke provides a middle ground
                        between Raley’s TXTual practice and ambient literature: In it work,
                        participants are directed to record personal stories tagged to geospatial
                        coordinates, leaving them there for other participants
                        to hear. In this, there is a reliance on a micro-community for the
                        production of content, but in a way that is more closely (and more
                        invisibly) woven into a socio-technical infrastructure, leaving the
                        micro-community less visible to itself.
                
                In reaching out and specifically engaging wide networks of socio-technical
                    relations and relying on contemporary network infrastructures rather than
                    immediate ones, these literary works repeat a question posed by Patrick Jagoda
                    when he asks: 
                        How do we understand networks when we treat them as
                            forms through which people daily encounter, manage, and construct
                            quasi-anonymous forms of being — whether the ambient reciprocities
                            afforded by social media such as Facebook or uncertain feelings about
                            the vicissitudes of the global economy?
                        
                    . This question concerning the ambient reciprocities
                    of networks lays at the heart of ambient literature, particularly as the
                    networks engaged by these works are not just traditional networks of people or
                    data, but are rather broader networks of context. 
                For researchers and others trying to understand these kinds of works, what does
                    it mean when the form of a work relies on distributed networks, unknown and
                    uncontrollable contexts, and the interactive completion of a work by readers?
                    This is the difficulty that poses a challenge to both traditional and
                    computational approaches to literary research. As these works rely on the
                    enacted context of the reader as it is embedded within wider contexts of global
                    communication networks, in each instance, works of ambient literature are always
                    different with different implications and different meanings. How can they be
                    reliably read?
            

                Reading the User Study
                What I want to argue here is that by treating the literary object of electronic
                    literature as much as a piece of literature as a piece of software to be
                    interacted with, it becomes possible to engage a kind of distant reading of
                    these unique and variable literary works. In doing so, critics are able to
                    engage these works as the overdetermined objects they are, attending to their
                    combined digital, historical, cultural, social, material, and textual lineages. 
                The idea of studying human interactions with computers has a rich history, one
                    which at many points seems to mirror the kinds of changes that can be found in
                    the shifting approaches to reading in literary studies. Starting in earnest as a
                    form of software psychology the goal of which 
                        was to establish the utility of a behavioral approach
                            to understanding software design, programming, and the use of
                            interactive systems, and to motivate and guide system developers to
                            consider the characteristics of human beings
                        
                    , HCI started with an explicit attention to the empirical investigation of
                    human behavior around technology. Taking a cue from human factors research,
                    particularly the approach developed by the industrial designer Henry Dreyfuss,
                    iterative user testing came to be a hallmark of the interaction design process
                        . For HCI, it was not enough to design
                    innovative computer systems: the design of these systems was to be guided by
                    studies of how users actually engaged such systems, with the results from these
                    studies feeding back into the work of design. While I am arguing here that
                        methods taken up and developed in HCI research are necessary for the
                        contemporary study of new forms of electronic literature, there are some
                        important differences between the aims of research in human computer
                        interaction and the aims of literary studies. Primarily among these is that
                        HCI is oriented not toward the study of existent phenomena, but toward the
                        enactment of new technological paradigms through the process of design. That
                        is, research in HCI is expected to produce some outcomes for future design,
                        rather than pure analysis of what exists. This is something that was
                        considered explicitly in relation to ethnographic work in a series of
                        articles by Paul Dourish 
                        , who, responding to reviewers who demanded the
                        inclusion of specific recommendations for design that might be generated out
                        of ethnographic work, noted that these ethnographic works have value in that
                        they 
                            provide us with new ways of imagining the
                                relationship between people and technology. They provide us with
                                ways of approaching design. However, they typically go beyond
                                specific instances of design. More to the point, they draw, in
                                general, on the fundamental repudiation of a traditional separation
                                between designer and user, between technology and practice
                            
                        .
                
                Entwined with this empirical attention to human users, the history of HCI is
                    colored by the scale and scope of its attention. Starting from concerns for how
                    to simply get hardware to be functional and extending through a cognitive
                    consideration of a single user at a computer terminal, toward a social space of
                    collaborative work, and finally to the cultural uses of computing 
                    , computing (and the study of interacting with
                    computers) can be seen to expand both as computational techniques increase in
                    sophistication and as additional domains come to be the subject of such
                    computerization. 
                As computing spread to areas beyond specialized and expert systems, the question
                    of how to conceptualize use beyond an individual user seated in front of a
                    computer terminal necessitated new approaches. In a critique of the positive
                    ontological framing of the Cartesian cognitivism used to undergird early work in
                    HCI, Lucy Suchman proposed a situated account of cognition, saying that 
                        behavior can only be understood in its relations with
                            real-world situations
                        
                    . That is, the context of the interaction came to be at least equally
                    important to (if not more important than) the psychological function at
                        work. One of the most famous examples that reinforces this comes in
                        the 1990s from research around the design of computerized systems for
                        aircraft control 
                        
                        . The aim was to replace antiquated paper systems
                        with computer displays to help controllers better perform their work. In
                        this case, the existing formal workflow described by the controllers which
                        involved the passing of paper slips with flight information around the
                        control booth as aircraft moved in and out of certain zones left out the
                        importance that the physical visibility of the paper slips themselves played
                        in supporting the controllers’ situational awareness of where other
                        controllers were tracking aircraft as they looked around the room. Initial
                        design work for computerized control systems which captured the specific
                        informational content of the paper slips but neglected to incorporate the
                        important role that the slips themselves played in supporting awareness
                        proved to be a failure. It was only through subsequent ethnographic analysis
                        of work practices that the source of the failure of the system design work
                        was discovered. This reevaluation of the methods used in
                    human-computer interaction research directed researchers away from (though not
                    entirely) lab-based studies of psychology and cognition and toward more in
                        situ studies. Through the use of ethnographic and other methods
                    developed from the social sciences and anthropology, human-computer interaction
                    research began to capture not only static, representative, and formalized
                    information practices, but also the situated, contextual, and meaningful
                    awareness that the movement of information itself illustrated. While HCI has
                    continued to expand the sphere of its concerns, addressing cultural, historical,
                    and aesthetic aspects of computation, Susanne Bødker 
                     has argued that these situated methods and an
                    attention to user studies remain a valuable part of HCI research. Just as with
                    distant reading, though the scale and scope of examination changed, the core of
                    the enterprise stays the same.
            

                Reading Experience
                As has been detailed above, in Speakmans’ It Must Have Been
                        Dark By Then, what comes to be included in the authored text of the
                    work is extended by the algorithmic function of the smartphone application
                    beyond the text proper. In it, readers are asked to seek out categories of
                    things present in their surroundings (an apartment block, a barrier, water,
                    etc.) and to transpose the specifics discussed in the narratives onto their
                    immediate experience. For Speakman’s piece, the specific buildings, trees,
                    horizons, people, etc. that a reader comes into contact with in the duration of
                    the piece are fodder for literary effect, with the authorial text coming to be
                    inscribed upon and altered by the contexts of the reader. While Speakman, as the
                    author of the piece, remains central, the work is opened up to the particular
                    contextual conditions of the reader.
                In its second wave, this is the position in which HCI found itself. There was an
                    explicit recognition that the situation of use wasn’t simply determined by the
                    specifics of the system with which users interacted. The success or failure —
                    the meaning of system — was determined, in large part, by the other conditions
                    of work that were present: 
                        Even so many work situations do not consist solely of
                            work at the desktop. Many other artefacts are used in changing
                            configurations with and around the computer. Most user interface design
                            has failed to recognize this, and accordingly we are still stuck with
                            the idea that new design should replace existing artefacts, rather than
                            exist together with them
                        
                    . As John McCarthy and Peter Wright approach Sherry Turkle’s examination
                    of people’s experience of the internet: 
                        People differ in many ways, including how they
                            integrate computers into their lives
                        
                    . The specifics of any interaction come to be determined by the situation
                    of use and the individual history of the user.
                For McCarthy and Wright, what comes to matter for human computer interaction is
                    the experience of technology, a widening sphere which comes to
                    include everything from 
                        what work is and what it is likely to be; our
                            orientation to fun and leisure; possible futures for education;
                            boundaries between private and public, between home and work, and
                            between knowledge and information; and even our own sense of what it is
                            to be ourselves, people situated in an increasingly strange relationship
                            with time, place, and other people
                        
                    . For ambient literature, the context that is brought to the work by the
                    reader opens itself up to a similarly broad set of sociological determinations
                    and engagements.
                The imperative for understanding these conditions which color user engagement has
                    been answered most often in HCI through programs of contextual inquiry  toward the aim of an ethnomethodological analysis 
                    . Often coupled with an ethnographic method
                    (identified by its qualitative, thick description of the perspectives
                    experienced by the subjects of the study), ethnomethodology refers to the
                    analytic perspective of the 
                        investigation of the rational properties of indexical
                            expressions and other practical actions as contingent ongoing
                            accomplishments of organized artful practices of everyday life
                        
                    . The constitution of these indexical practices is not given by a
                    pre-defined social structure, but is enacted by individuals who, by the efforts
                    put into their activities, come to be members in common
                    social accomplishments of intelligibility. Literature which incorporates the
                    reader’s wider field of social being into the work can be understood to likewise
                    engage in this work of creating social meaning. 
                Rather than being focused on the societal facts that guide social interactions,
                    ethnomethodology focuses on the negotiation of the meaning of social
                    interactions. Like close reading, it looks to delve into the present surface of
                    a social text and come to understand what goes on in the processes of making
                    such a text meaningful or effective. For thinking about ambient literature
                    through such an analytic lens, an ethnomethodological approach is focused on the
                    explication of the functional processes by which meaning is enacted as part of
                    the situated context of the text. 
                In the study of ambient literature, what this means is a focus on the ways in
                    which the text of the work and the wider contextual (social, locational,
                    cultural, etc.) forms with which it engages come to enlist the reader in a
                    process of meaning-making. In the attention toward the text of the work as is
                    the aim of literary studies, there is a kind of inversion of a
                    ethnomethodological practice in that it is here concerned with how the text writ
                    large engages in the practical action of accomplishment rather than how
                    individuals form social meaning. In this, an ethnomethodological approach is
                    utilized in order to understand the function of the work, this as a work is
                    constituted by the experience of the participant. In this,
                        ethnomethodology has much the same aim as some varieties of close reading as
                        they are concerned with the 
                            the examination of an artifact to see how it was
                                made and how it worked
                            
                        . Like an ethnomethodological approach, close reading encourages 
                            a respect for the stubbornness of texts, which
                                resist easy comprehension or description in terms of expected themes
                                and motifs. The close reader needs to be willing to take seriously
                                the difficulties of singular, unexpected turns of phrase,
                                juxtapositions, and opacity. Close reading teaches an interest in
                                the strangeness or distinctiveness of individual works and parts of
                                works
                            
                        . Like close reading, ethnomethodology encourages digging into the
                        present surface of a given text. The aim is to first come to
                    understand the manner by which the work engages in the artful
                        practices of everyday life in communion with the given cultural,
                    social, and situated context of the reader and then to come to understand the
                    specific experience of the reader.
                What ethnomethodology comes to offer is the opportunity to not only understand
                    the meaningful function of works of ambient literature, but a chance to engage
                    in a close reading of the experience of the work. It is this experience of the
                    work that provides the proper object of an empirical study of these kinds of
                    works. This reading is conducted through a series of “reader studies” which,
                    modeled on user studies, offer the text up to multiple readers in order to
                    capture their engagement with a work. These readers might be interested
                    participants already primed for the experience of electronic literature or a
                    more generally representative population, but what matters is that there is an
                    attention toward the enactment of the work of ambient literature by multiple
                    users, in multiple contexts, and on multiple occasions, with the record of their
                    experience of the work (collected through observation of and interview with
                    participants) coming to form the basis of a critical
                        reading of the text.
                The quasi-ethnographic methodological approach of a deep investigation of the
                    motives, reactions, opinions, and general situation of the readers to the works
                    supports an ethnomethodological analysis of the ways in which a work comes to
                    make its meaning. In his rough sketch of a kind of phenomenal reading,
                        Brian Reed presents an account of a reading which is concerned with
                        developing what Merleau-Ponty termed 
                            an account of space, time, and the world as we
                                ‘live’ them
                            
                        . What is particularly of interest in this approach is the perspective
                        taken on the perceiving subject which has a 
                            history and an array of attributes and affiliations
                                that uniquely inflect his or her experience of the world or, to put
                                it more accurately, that prompt the world to disclose itself to him
                                or her in a unique way
                            
                        . For Reed, these kinds of narrative accounts of the experience
                        of a text allow for the conveying of the 
                            intricacy, contingency, and richness of perceptual
                                and affective experience
                            
                        . The investigation into readers’ experience of the work is not
                    limited to what goes on in the given text, but as the text of the work itself is
                    extended to include the wider contextual world of its enactment, the
                    investigation must necessarily approach the mechanics of the network of factors
                    at work that lead to the production of meaning. In this, there is an importance
                    given to the entirety of readers’ experience of a work, including any paratext,
                    infrastructure, technologies, or other networks which come to play a role. 
                This ethnomethodological approach constitutes a different kind of analytic
                    reading practice in which the experience of participants is “read” as part of
                    the study of literature. The reading of literary analysis
                    comes in the form of a user study in which real readers are studied as they
                    really engage with the texts. This approach is not unlike that taken up on
                        a smaller and more reflexive scale by Jessica Pressman, Mark C. Marino, and
                        Jeremy Douglass in their own Reading
                            Project in which they collectively chart their own experiences
                        of reading William Poundstone’s Project for
                            Tachistoscope {Bottomless Pit}. Presenting a challenging text
                        that through its presentation attempts to escape an easy reading,
                        Poundstone’s project presents readers with a dynamic text. Of course, the
                        readers of the Reading Project are professional
                        readers in that they were reading for the specific purpose of analysis. In
                        some ways, it presents similar challenges as do works of ambient literature
                        in that 
                            [i]ts fast-flashing aesthetic is seemingly
                                incompatible with the slow, sustained contemplation of close reading
                                and other traditional methods of literary analysis
                            
                        . For these works for which the ultimate text experienced by
                    readers is unavailable, it is only through this distant method of reading the
                    experiences of participating readers that a full picture of the work is able to
                    be developed. 
            

                Reading Distance
                Such an ethnomethodological approach developed from HCI follows on both distant
                    reading’s empirical orientation, its sociological foundations, and its frequent
                    use of secondary experiences of a text. However, ethnomethodology is
                    differentiated from the approaches that form the early core of distant reading
                    particularly in that it presents a largely (though not exclusively) qualitative
                    account of the constitution of social action rather than being founded on a
                    largely (through again, not exclusively) quantitative description of its
                    objects. So, while these digitally-founded works of ambient literature might
                    elude a computational distant reading due to their explicit inclusion of an
                    extra-textual and non-quantifiable context as part of the literary text, an
                    ethnomethodological approach as developed from HCI is able to provide insight
                    into these works, even as they present a variable text that is particular to the
                    situation of the reader.
                This method presents a hybrid approach to reading that is illustrative of
                    combinations of interpretive and programmatic readings as found in many other
                    examples of distant reading. It is close in the attention to detail
                    and examination of the mechanics of the text (as represented in the experience
                    of the reader), but it remains distant in that it is derived from
                    information coming second hand. It is distant in that it extends its analysis
                    beyond the text itself, but it is close in that these extra-textual aspects of
                    the experience of the reader are part of the text itself. 
                Perhaps most provocatively, this kind of method presents a radicalization of
                    Moretti’s infamous conjecture on literature that 
                        literary history will quickly become very different
                            from what it is now: it will become ‘second hand’: a patchwork of other
                            people’s research, without a single direct textual reading. Still
                            ambitious, and actually even more so than before (world literature!);
                            but the ambition is now directly proportional to the distance from the
                            text: the more ambitious the project, the greater must the distance
                            be
                        
                    . Beyond looking toward multiple existing critical engagements, we look to
                    multiple readings of works by a number of readers. Unlike reader response theory
                    or cognitive studies of literature which might also take on some aspect of a
                    user study (the further development of which Hayles recommends in her account of
                    Foer’s erasure), this method of reading through the experience of other readers
                    takes on a sociological, rather than psychological approach. Such a method
                        accords with the decline in the view, as noted by Reed, that 
                            academics, believing that they brought to light
                                what had been ‘hidden, repressed, deep,’ implicitly cast themselves
                                as diagnosticians, detectives, and truth speakers, thereby lending
                                their profession seriousness and social significance
                            
                        . By opening the interpretation of a work up to multiple viewpoints
                        (oftentimes selected at random, and often from subjects standing not in
                        appreciation of the genre and often hostile to the works), any monolithic
                        rendering of a work is resisted. 
                As a mode of literary analysis, this approach is indebted to the perspective
                    given in Peter Middleton’s Distant Reading, where
                    he takes a quasi-ethnomethodological approach toward a reading of the entirety
                    of the long biography of a poem . In this, Middleton’s version of distant reading
                    is distinct from something like Moretti’s, while still preserving an empirical
                    and sociological intention. Where Middleton examines the life of well known
                    works of literature from a largely historical perspective, what I am proposing
                    here is a fully contemporary account of present day readers and their experience
                    of works as they exist and are enacted today. Where Middleton might rely on an
                    analysis of existing interpretations of a work by other readers, an
                    ethnomethodological account in the tradition of HCI research calls for an active
                    engagement with the actual situations of the meaningful occurrence of a work.
                    While Middleton’s focus on 20th century poetry guided his approach, the
                    challenges of the study of electronic literature require a different approach to
                    ethnomethodological research that incorporates the influence of HCI.
                    Nevertheless, the focus on both the really-existing conditions of a work’s
                    reception and the reliance on the experience of a work by readers remains a
                    strong common core between these two approaches. 
                Coming to a work at a distance through a qualitative method such as
                    ethnomethodology, it remains possible to address the 
                        obscurity, difficulty, strangeness, and the upwelling
                            of the unknown in a text are themselves part of the
                            signification
                        
                    , allowing the question of interaction with a work to be, as Bødker had it
                    speaking of HCI, one of 
                        multiplicity, context, boundaries, experience, and
                            participation
                        
                    . As Brian Reed points out, the perspective developed by Middleton favors
                    a more multifaceted account of the experience of a text . What is gained from approaching a text as an occasion for a user study is
                    that a user study (and the approach described here) provides insight that is
                    distinct from any single narrative. For Middleton, this 
                        history of responses, uses, memories, expectations and
                            other actions (much more heterogeneous than literary criticism usually
                            acknowledges) constitutes the only singularity it has
                        
                    . The same can be said of the experience of ambient literature. 
            

                Methodological Nearness
                What makes the figure of a computational and algorithmic distant reading so
                    striking, beyond its being embroiled with a wider span of computerization
                    movements , is that it calls for, as Ryan Heuser and
                    Long Le-Khac  point out, a new kind of reading, a new
                    interpretive mode by which the meaning of texts is understood. For works of
                    ambient literature, this movement moves in the opposite direction, but is the
                    same move: new works of computationally derived literatures require new modes of
                    reading. In each case, the method of reading requires proximity to that which is
                    being examined. Largely, the distant reading of the digital humanities works to
                    bring a vast corpus nearer, to 
                        to pursue big questions we’ve always wanted to ask with
                            evidence not from a selection of texts, but from something approaching
                            the entire literary or cultural record
                        
                    . For us here, looking at these works of electronic literature which tap
                    into the fabric of our collective data and algorithmic-obsessed lives, this
                    method of reading the experience of a number of different readers as they come
                    to make sense of the works brings us nearer to the transient and serendipitous
                    nature of works which are never the same, but are always specific and not
                    random. This mode of distantly reading an ethnomethodological account of the
                    experience of readers, one which focuses on the implications and possibilities
                    of the work and not the social or psychological formation, reinforces the
                    humanistic foundations of any kind of reading. 
                Any empirical method of reading, or any reading that follows along a logic of
                    semiotics, rotates on this interpretive moment. As Heuser and Le-Khac put it in
                    their study of word vectors, it is necessary to distinguish between signals
                    which are available to computers and the concepts that are 
                        the phenomenon we take a signal to stand for
                        
                    . They go on to say that 
                        [i]n the digital humanities, the interest and impact of
                            our arguments are based on concepts, but computers can only measure
                            signals, which are always smaller than concepts
                        
                    . In turn, they cite Dan Cohen in his assertion that for work in the
                    digital humanities, one has to be careful in simply using the terms developed in
                    pre-digital work: new scales of work require new concepts . More than this, however, Lisa Marie Rhody reminds us
                    that Moretti’s invocation of distant reading enjoins us to look instead of read,
                    with such an approach reigniting 
                        long-standing philosophical, political, and cultural
                            tensions in its attempt to transcend socially constructed boundaries
                            between the temporal and spatial arts
                        
                    . 
                However, here, in looking at ethnomethodology a kind of distant reading, the
                    signals which are received from empirical research are not smaller than
                    concepts, they are simply another layer of concept. What is received is not
                    simply a numerical account of a phenomena (as if capturing a numerical account
                    of anything is ever a simple matter), but a phenomenological one. In this case,
                    the newness of the concepts required in this work of the digital humanities
                    comes in the lattice of concepts that is developed and built, an assemblage
                    fitting to the more widely socio-technical for of the works examined. There is
                    an introduction of the question of scale not just as a matter of scope, but also
                    of depth and magnitude.
                James F. English and Ted Underwood raise this explicit question of scale as they
                    identify a cluster of scalar constructs which serve to orient literary studies: 
                        Certain temporal spans (century, literary period,
                            artistic generation), geocultural categories (national literature,
                            regional literature, diasporic or exilic literature), formal entities
                            (protagonist, genre, individual work), and so forth supply us with the
                            basic units we need to organize our research projects and structure our
                            intellectual and institutional divisions of labor
                        
                    . As they note, the history of literary studies is the story of the
                    contraction and expansion of the scale of study, from the text itself out to the
                    surrounding context. Where previously there might have been a call to attend to
                    only the text of a work of literature itself, it becomes possible to see a
                    revived 
                        attention to the history of books and manuscripts and
                            textual variants, to systems of print and publication, institutions of
                            sale and circulation, practices of reading and reception
                        
                    . For us, looking at an algorithmic literature which is able to invisibly
                    draw in wider socio-technical networks, it becomes possible to add to Underwood
                    and English’s examples. 
                These different literary materials (information networks, data, urban
                    infrastructures, databases, algorithms, and the specifics of their experience)
                    bring with them both a different scale and different texture. In describing
                    their concept of literary pattern recognition, Long and So
                    invoke something that 
                        brings together close reading, cultural history, and
                            machine learning so that they supplement one another
                        
                    . In this, Long and So highlight the effectiveness of working at different
                    scales, of the ways that these different kinds of literary textures can be felt.
                    For works of ambient literature, as they engage the specificity of the
                    socio-technical context of individual readers in particular and irrevocable
                    ways, there is a call to understand the multiple expressions of these works
                    through a distant reading of the experience of others. Just as a computational
                    distant reading opens the patterns it reveals to interpretation, so too does a
                    computational literature. There is a nearness to the distant method at work.
                This nearness is on display when Andrew Piper says, in reference to the uses of
                    computational modeling in literary analysis: 
                        technology impacts argument not solely through the new
                            truths it produces, but also in the ways it changes our affective
                            attachments to the texts that we read
                        
                    . In many ways, this is Piper’s answer to his quoted rheumination that
                    started the present article: 
                        What would it mean for a novel to turn us as we turn
                            its pages? How are we not simply moved, but transformed — turned around
                            — through the novel’s combination of gestural and affective
                            structures?
                        
                    .
                Placing this alongside Dovey’s initial provocation of the idea of ambient
                    literature in which such works can be seen to ask 
                        how can situated literary experiences delivered through
                            pervasive media systems produce moments where the individual reader or
                            listener is repositioned and offered new ways to experience and
                            understand their moment within the complexity of the urban informatic
                            flow?
                        
                    , it is possible to chart out the links that bind not only ambient
                    literature to a kind of distant reading, but also the affective connections that
                    resonate across a computational field of socio-technical effect.
                As literature comes to embrace the kinds of contextual variability made possible
                    by ubiquitous computing, it becomes necessary to adopt new methodologies for
                    analysis that are able to capture the embodied, situated, and experiential
                    nature of the works. By reading electronic literature through an
                    ethnomethodologically-oriented user study, it is possible to engage in a reading
                    that is simultaneously close and distant, one that is founded on both the
                    experiences of readers at large and on the interpretations of an expert reader.
                    In doing this, in these cases, literary studies takes up a method nearer to the
                    computational object of its attention.
            

                Acknowledgements
                An early version of some of the ideas presented here were presented as part of
                    the Locating the Literary seminar hosted by the Centre for Literature Between
                    Media (Aarhus, 2017). I would like to thank Stephen Gregg, Søren Pold, Alice
                    Bell, Amy Spencer, Jon Dovey, Sarah Mygind, Tore Rye Andersen, Kate Pullinger,
                    and Nick Triggs for comments, advice, recommendations, assistance, and material
                    support. Thanks also goes to the editors of Digital
                        Humanities Quarterly who provided helpful comments in the revision
                    of this article. This work is funded by a grant from the UK’s Arts and
                    Humanities Research Council. 
            
