Title:   Starting and Sustaining Digital Humanities/Digital
               Scholarships Centers: Lessons from the
               Trenches
Volume:  017
Issue:  3
Date:  6 October 2023
Abstract:  
            
            Along with the growth in Digital Humanities (DH) and Digital Scholarship (DS) as
               digital methods, resources, and tools for research, teaching and dissemination,
               interest in starting DH/DS centers as a means to support and sustain researchers and
               projects is fast increasing.  For those leading these initiatives, it raises
               questions about the ways to engage possible stakeholders to develop support for a
               centre, apply existing models, secure funding sources, and many others.  This article
               contributes to this discussion by examining the experiences of ten DH/DS centers in
               North America and discerning smart practices for those wishing to start a similar
               center.  Often started by faculty or administrative champions, the interviewed
               centers have a long history of operations.  They offer a suite of activities and
               services, ranging from consulting, training, access to technology, project support,
               and others, with staff drawn from libraries, faculties, student ranks, and other
               locations.  These efforts support teachers, researchers, and students in their
               efforts to undertake DH/DS projects.  The centers are often funded through a
               combination of base budgets and soft money and may be based in a library or faculty. 
               The paper concludes with implications for practice for those wishing to start their
               own DH/DS center.
         
Full Body Text: 

            
            
               Introduction

               Along with the growth in Digital Humanities (DH) and Digital Scholarship (DS) as
                  digital methods, resources, and tools for research, teaching and dissemination,
                  interest in starting DH/DS centers as a means to support and sustain researchers
                  and projects is fast increasing. There is a long history of successful DH/DS
                  centers that accomplish these goals. Some early centers include Princeton and
                  Rutgers’ Center for Electronic Texts in the Humanities (1991), The University of
                  Virginia’s Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities (1993), Brown
                  University’s Scholarly Technology Group (1994) and ones at Oxford and King’s
                  College London . For those leading these initiatives,
                  it raises questions about the ways to engage possible stakeholders to develop
                  support for a centre, apply existing models, secure funding sources, and many
                  others. 

               There have been various attempts to answer these questions and guide those wishing
                  to start their own center. Efforts include workshops such as CNI-ARL’s one on
                  planning a digital scholarship center  and
                  Flanders and Mylonas’ course at HILT . To further aid
                  nascent centers, centerNet  has developed a page of
                  resources for starting and sustaining DH centers which includes articles, talks
                  and documentation from existing centers. Additionally, in 2013, there was a
                  discussion thread on Humanist about ways to plan for a DH center , , . Finally, successful DH/DS centers have published case
                  study articles that provide insight into their experiences and ways that this
                  might be replicated in other settings , , , , , , and . 

               This article contributes to this discussion by examining the experiences of ten
                  DH/DS centers in North America and discerning smart practices for those wishing to
                  start a similar center. We can learn from those who are already involved in such
                  centers and transfer these insights to others. Finally, this article will help
                  advance the minimal knowledge base regarding the creation and sustainability of
                  research and teaching centers in Digital Humanities and Digital Scholarship.
            

            
               Context

               There is much debate about the definition of DH and DS with the terms sometimes
                  used interchangeably . From a broad perspective,
                  digital scholarship involves the creation, production,
                     analysis, or dissemination of new scholarship using digital or computational
                     techniques, or both
                  , allowing for both research and tool building.
                  Digital humanities and digital social science are often included within this
                  definition , . At a more
                  basic level, digital scholarship centers have a broader mandate than digital
                  humanities ones which are often specialized research centers
                     led by a group of faculty and serving only select disciplines rather than a
                     broad campus community
                  . 

               Regardless of how defined, broadly speaking, according to , these types of centers are cyberinfrastructure that
                  include collections of expertise, equipment, and software, and generate economies
                  of scale in terms of both resources and expertise. Echoing this,  argues that a digital humanities
                     center is an entity where new media and technologies are used for
                     humanities-based research, teaching, and intellectual engagement and
                     experimentation. The goals of the center are to further humanities scholarship,
                     create new forms of knowledge, and explore technology’s impact on
                     humanities-based disciplines. A center implies a
                     central (physical and/or virtual) area where a suite of activities are
                     conducted by individuals dedicated to a common mission
                  . They create an anchoring space, bring technical
                  expertise into one location, and provide for networking opportunities . Ultimately, these [c]entres and
                     laboratories, therefore, contribute to enhancing the visibility of the
                     humanities on campus and beyond
                  . They help create new digital resources and
                  tools that develop benefits for the humanities community and beyond . 

               It is difficult to identify a typical DH/DS center because there is no single
                  model , , . They are generally structured around the strengths and
                  priorities of partners and institutions , , , , , . For example, centers might focus on service,
                  research, pedagogy, or a combination of these activities. Others can be organized
                  around a theme or discipline such as media studies or a single activity like
                  digitization. Some centers might build tools and resources or host them , , , . In terms of administrative
                  homes, some centers are freestanding at the faculty or university level while
                  others are part of existing departments or may even be their own department.
                  Further, some might be support services and part of a library or computing
                  services . The reporting structure is also dependent
                  on the particular center. They might report to a variety of people, including a
                  dean, provost, vice president or department chair. These reporting relationships
                  may be formal or informal. It is also not uncommon for centers to change their
                  administrative home and mandate over time . 

               Regardless of focus and mission, a common set of activities can be identified
                  which enable someone to receive advice and/or become a place where ideas can be
                  developed and shared all to the end of developing new knowledge , , . These activities might include but are not limited
                  to:

               
                  Building digital collections and resources for scholarly activities or
                     teaching 
                  Creating tools for authoring, building digital collections, analyzing
                     collections, data and/or research processes, and managing the research process 
                  Offering training and mentoring in the form of workshops, courses, academic
                     degree programs, postgraduate and faculty training, fellowships and
                     internships
                  Hosting lectures, programs, conferences, seminars and events on digital
                     humanities and digital scholarship for general or academic audiences. These
                     might take the format of one-on-one or group sessions.
                  Providing collegial support, consultation, and collaboration with
                     individuals from other academic departments, libraries, and organizations on
                     digital preservation, curation, digital project management, digitization,
                     intellectual property, metadata, open access, text encoding, text mining, and
                     other topics
                  Conducting research in humanities, digital humanities, and other
                     disciplines
                  Serving as an information portal for a particular humanities discipline and
                     repository for humanities-based digital collections
                  Providing technology solutions to humanities departments
                  Assisting with grant writing
                  Providing seed grants and funding for digital projects
                  Providing access to software and hardware
                  Offering a physical and/or virtual space for work, consultation and
                     facilitation of knowledge transfer , , , , , , , . 
               

               These centers tend to meet the needs of several key stakeholders. These include 
               
                  campus members such as faculty, staff, students, postdoctoral and faculty
                     fellows, and campus administrators. Researchers and staff might come from
                     various disciplines including humanities, social sciences, computer science,
                     sciences, business, and others 
                  people beyond the campus which can include visiting or international
                     scholars and researchers
                  the educational community, such as K-12 schools
                  organizations such as museums, other research centers, and industry
                  the general public and community groups , , , .
               

               Regardless of the types of services offered, these centers tend to have both
                  physical and virtual presences. Some are more physical in nature when primary
                  users are located close to each other while others are more virtual when their
                  users are more geographically dispersed . The origin
                  story for each center is different. Sometimes, a single occurrence, such as
                  conversations with a senior administrator or funder who then offers money, prompts
                  the center’s start. In other cases, similar activities are grouped together under
                  an umbrella of DH/DS. Others are the result of a campus wide initiative to promote
                  the humanities or digital scholarship. Further, some centers have their start as
                  computing service/IT units which slowly over time offered support to digital
                  humanities projects. An academic entrepreneur sometimes plays a role. In these
                  cases, a faculty member may start a center to meet their research needs and then
                  grows it to include other digital research programs. Finally, for others, the
                  process is not linear as the center moves from a project to a program. This takes
                  effort to gain buy-in from others on campus . In many
                  cases, a champion is needed to make the case for investments through staff
                  allocation, funding, and project development , .

               While the primary study of digital humanities centers was conducted by  and supplemented by other studies , there have been several case studies published which
                  provide perspectives for other institutions interested in starting an initiative.
                  One lesson focuses on the size of the center and its rate of growth. Many of the
                  case studies started small and grow slowly , , . In some cases,
                  centers may begin with staff that are available locally . As one example, in 1999, the Maryland Institute for
                  Technology in the Humanities (MITH) started with a director and two research
                  assistants and grew by 2012 to include ten faculty and full-time personnel with
                  another approximately dozen full- or part-time staff who were supported through
                  grant funding, graduate assistantships, federal work studies, and internships . Further, SUNY Oswego started with a computer
                  scientist interested in DH and grew to several hires with administrative support
                  and a program in DH for undergrads .

               These examples also demonstrate that a common space for a center is the library
                     , , . A library is seen to be an interdisciplinary space
                  where faculty are accustomed to using technology and services there. It is a space
                  that is well-visited and possesses technical infrastructure, software, and
                  collections with expertise in metadata, copyright, data management, digital
                  preservation, and project management , . Librarians may also have the ability to bring
                  different parties together through their relationships with faculty and
                  researchers and a history of collaboration .

               These case studies also found that the timing has to be right , with a focus on an institution’s mission and
                  strategic goals . For example, the University of
                  Utah found that an earlier incarnation of a digital scholarship center failed to
                  gain a critical mass. At the same time, it dealt with budget retrenchment which
                  caused the library to refocus efforts on core services. As a result, this center
                  disbanded. The second time around proved more successful as the new center built
                  on efforts in other parts of campus and developed key academic partnerships and
                  shared ownership and investment . The University
                  of Kansas’ Institute for Digital Research in the Humanities  and Middle Tennessee State University  also built on activities already under way. These
                  efforts are collaborative, involving many stakeholders. For example, the
                  University of Kansas’s center had three primary stakeholders which included the
                  library, the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, and the Hall Center for the
                  Humanities, all providing financial support and guidance .

               As part of starting activities, nascent centers gather information to determine
                  the need for it and associated services. This includes seeking information from
                  local stakeholders and outside experts and conducting an environmental scan , , . The University of Utah found that outside experts
                  focused on the need for strong relationships with administration who could provide
                  financial backing and political capital. Further, these individuals stressed that
                  the new center’s mission should be shaped by local needs and strengths. This
                  knowledge guided their efforts to start a center . Similarly, Appalachian State University undertook a gap analysis between what
                  was presently being offered on campus and what was needed in order to determine
                  key activities for the new center . In addition,
                  SUNY Oswego conducted a survey to determine the extent of DH/DS activities on
                  campus and used the results to inform next steps . As
                  a final example, Yale hired a design anthropologist to determine the needs for DH
                  on campus which would then inform the design of a DH center in the library. To
                  gather this information, the anthropologist conducted interviews with students,
                  faculty, and staff from different backgrounds, held design workshops, and
                  undertook benchmarking research with colleagues from other institutions .
            

            

               Methodology

               Through semi-structured interviews, ten center directors were asked a series of
                  questions about their DH/DS center. An attempt was made to have a variety of
                  representation from Canada and the United States, size of institution and age of
                  the center. The directors were all known to the researcher. The interviews were
                  conducted primarily through zoom. Lasting about an hour, the interviews focused on
                  open-ended questions that explored the center, its mandate and services, budget,
                  staffing, center’s history, key factors of success, and challenges to being a
                  center. These interviews allowed the researcher to explore topics more fully and
                  deeply with probing follow-up questions while the participants reflected on their
                  own experiences and emphasized those issues that were important to them. Analysis
                  of documents and articles related to the centers supplemented the interviews. 

               Data analysis involved a grounded theory approach that focused on the themes that
                  emerged from the data. This analysis was broken into several steps. First, working
                  from audio recordings and detailed notes, the data was organized, read, and coded
                  to determine categories, themes, and patterns. Those categories were then tested
                  for emergent and alternative understandings, both within a single interview and
                  across all interviews. This was an iterative process, involving movement between
                  the data, codes, and concepts, constantly comparing the data to itself and the
                  developing themes , , . 
            


            
               Findings
               These interviews provided insight into center start up, key activities, human
                  resources, budget allocation, key factors of success, and challenges.

               
                  Center history
                  
                     Center founding years
                     
                        Institution
                        Founding year
                     
                     
                        Princeton Center for Digital Humanities
                        2010-2011
                     
                     
                        Indiana University Institute for Digital Arts and Humanities
                        2007
                     
                     
                        Northeastern University Digital Scholarship Group
                        2014 (formal start in 2015)
                     
                     
                        Texas A&M (TAMU) Center of Digital Humanities Research
                        2011
                     
                     
                        University of Saskatchewan Digital Research Centre
                        2007
                     
                     
                        Hamilton College Digital Humanities initiatives
                        2009 
                     
                     
                        Toronto Metropolitian University Centre for Digital Humanities
                        2012
                     
                     
                        CUNY Graduate Center Digital Initiatives
                        2012
                     
                     
                        Brown University Center for Digital Scholarship
                        1994
                     
                     
                        University of Nebraska Center for Digital Research in the
                           Humanities
                        2005
                     
                  


                  These centers have long histories supporting faculty, staff, and students at
                     their institutions with the oldest being over 20 years old. During this time,
                     these have not stayed static for many have undergone several iterations and
                     name changes. By way of example, the Center for Digital Scholarship at Brown
                     University started as the Scholarly Technology Group based in IT in 1994 and
                     then moved to the library in 2008. During this time, there have been several
                     name changes to reflect its changing mandate. As another example, the Digital
                     Humanities initiative (DHi) at Hamilton College was conceived in 2009 and
                     received a Mellon Grant in 2010 to develop the center. While the primary focus
                     was initially on the humanities, the initiative’s mandate was broadened in 2019
                     to become a suite of services available to the full campus. The transition came
                     about after changes in senior management roles. Finally, the University of
                     Saskatchewan’s Humanities and Fine Arts Digital Research Centre is now known as
                     the Digital Research Center. The name change corresponded with a move from its
                     faculty home to the library and reflects that the center is now focused on the
                     entire university and less discipline specific. 

                  There are several different ways that these centers started. Some began around
                     individual faculty projects who became faculty champions and generated support
                     for a center. At Princeton, at the time of their tenure, a faculty member had
                     materials for the archive and saw the potential for digital humanities at an
                     institution where there was little. They had the vision and passion for
                     creating a center and envisioned a unit which would undertake research with
                     faculty members and train the next generation of humanities scholars.
                     Consequently, the faculty member asked the provost for start-up funds and
                     created buy-in from the chief information officer, faculty members, librarians
                     and graduate students and started The Princeton Center for Digital Humanities.
                     Another example is Toronto Metropolitan University in Canada where two faculty
                     members had a digital project and started the Centre for Digital Humanities
                     informally. It became a formal research center when they needed space to house
                     its activities. A third instance is at University of Saskatchewan where a
                     faculty member who was at the time vice dean of Arts and Fine Arts wanted to
                     create digital editions but needed space and equipment for graduate students to
                     work. Several others wanted to collaborate with this person. Consequently, the
                     participating faculty members received money for space renovations, equipment,
                     and a staff member and started the center. 

                  Other centers started as a strategic direction for the institution. At Texas
                     A&M, a white paper was developed which outlined a vision for a digital
                     humanities center and delivered to the Vice President Research who provided
                     funding for space, a director and equipment. The initiative built on the
                     strengths of faculty who were already doing research and getting grants in the
                     area. Another example is the University of Nebraska where the university wanted
                     to create programs of excellence in select areas which would allow the
                     institution to build world class expertise. Digital Humanities was argued to be
                     one of these areas where the university could lead the world. The result was
                     several cluster hires and a research center. Finally, CUNY had a provost
                     interested in digital initiatives who provided support to the center start up
                     and operations.
               
            


            
               Key Activities Offered

               
                  Key Center Activities
                  
                     Institution
                     Activities
                  
                  
                     Princeton
                     
                        
                           Collaborate/consult on faculty research projects
                           Support graduate students and postdoctoral fellows 
                           Provide training in project management
                           Provide faculty projects with graduate student project
                              managers
                           Provide funding for project incubation, data curation, technical
                              development, conference travel for faculty and students
                           Host talks
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Indiana University
                     
                        
                           Consult on projects
                           Host summer incubator to foster project development
                           Sponsor speaker series, training, workshops, spring
                              symposium
                           Provide funding for faculty and grad student projects
                           Offer faculty fellowships, student mentorship and training
                           Offer certificate and minor program
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Northeastern University
                     
                        
                           Host speakers, workshops/training
                           Host interns
                           Provide project support, mentorship, consultation
                           Provide graduate and undergraduate student research assistantships
                              and internships
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     TAMU
                     
                        
                           Deliver workshops and courses
                           Host speakers
                           Deliver a book series
                           Offer internships, assistantships and postdoctoral fellowships,
                              graduate student training
                           Provide faculty project support and funding
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Saskatchewan
                     
                        
                           Provide digital assess management, digital preservation,
                              digitization
                           Provide exhibit research support
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Hamilton
                     
                        
                           Consulting on data management and grant proposals
                           Host speakers, training, and workshops
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Toronto Metropolitan
                     
                        
                           Provide training to graduate and undergraduate students
                           Host workshops and speakers
                           Sponsor research fellows
                           Consult on research and digital pedagogy
                           Facilitate faculty research
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     CUNY
                     
                        
                           Offer Workshops/training/degree courses
                           Consult on student and faculty projects
                           Provide lab space and maker space
                           Provide grant funding for graduate students
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Brown
                     
                        
                           Offer workshops and training
                           Provide faculty project support
                           Support digital publications
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Nebraska
                     
                        
                           Consult on project and grant proposals
                           Sponsor speakers
                           Train graduate and undergraduate student interns and research
                              assistants
                           Support postdoctoral fellowships
                           Assist with project design and metadata
                        
                     
                  
               



               Despite the different start up scenarios, these centers undertake some common
                  activities. They all tend to offer consulting, access to technology (hardware and
                  software), speaker series, workshops, and training for faculty and students. In
                  some cases, these activities also go further to include project management,
                  research and pedagogy support, grant writing assistance, seed grants, and others.
                  They all have a virtual presence through a website, which has become especially
                  important in this age of COVID-19. These centers also have physical spaces and
                  offer work and meeting area for faculty, staff, and students.

               Many of these centers are physically based in the library. At Princeton, the
                  physical space is seen as a place where people from different faculties can gather
                  and meet. Echoing this, the University of Nebraska felt that the library was a
                  neutral space where everyone can interact and have interdisciplinary
                  conversations. Indiana University uses its physical space in the library to
                  provide meeting space, consultation, access to equipment, scanning lab, and
                  makerspace, and programing such as a summer incubator program. Understanding the
                  important role that libraries play, the University of Saskatchewan and Hamilton
                  College moved from their faculty home to the library and broadened their mandate
                  to include the rest of campus. It is important to note that just because a center
                  is based in the library, it does not mean that it is the administrative home for
                  it. Toronto Metropolitan University is based in the library but reports
                  administratively to the Faculty of Arts. In other cases, the centers are located
                  outside the library structure. For example, at Texas A&M, the Center of
                  Digital Humanities Research is in the liberal arts building with an administrative
                  home in the College of Liberal Arts.

               Each of the centers had some focus on student development. At Hamilton, DHi
                  supported undergraduate students to work with faculty through grants. This was
                  successful as students developed skills that allowed them to get into graduate
                  programs and find employment. This focus fits the mission of small liberal arts
                  colleges . Indiana University followed the same
                  model to the same end, that is students gaining valuable skills that translated
                  into employment afterwards. Princeton also found this benefit as they supported
                  graduate students as fellows for their own research projects. In this way, they
                  were creating the next generation of humanities scholars.
            


            
               Staffing

               
                  Center staffing
                  
                     Institution
                     Staff numbers (including portions of people’s time, part time staff,
                        students, and affiliated researchers)
                  
                  
                     Princeton
                     
                        
                           6 Permanent staff plus faculty director
                           Temporary 50% designer, 50% admin
                           Graduate and undergraduate students as fellows, research
                              assistants, grant recipients
                           Postdoctoral fellow funded by Humanities Council
                           Affiliate members
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Indiana University
                     
                        
                           Co-directors, library and faculty
                           1 Full time staff – Admin and Outreach Coordinator
                           2 PhD graduate assistant positions
                           1 Masters assistant position
                           Graduate fellows
                           Contributions from library
                           Faculty Fellows
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Northeastern University
                     
                        
                           9 Permanent full time staff
                           Lab coordinator 
                           Visiting student fellows 
                           Staff and faculty fellows
                           Half time director
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     TAMU
                     
                        
                           1 FTE program coordinator
                           1 FTE programmer
                           Director
                           Associate director
                           Affiliate faculty
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Saskatchewan
                     
                        
                           Library staff, 2 ½ - 3 FTES
                           Co-directors – library and faculty
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Hamilton
                     
                        
                           Co-directors
                           Programmer plus library/IT staff
                           Student assistantships
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Toronto Metropolitan
                     
                        
                           Director 
                           1 Project manager (part time)
                           2 Senior research fellows
                           20 Research fellows
                           15 Members
                           8 Associate research fellows
                           16 Student research fellows
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     CUNY
                     
                        
                           Graduate student fellows
                           2 Full time staff
                           Director 
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Brown
                     
                        
                           Graduate student fellows
                           2 People to publication effort
                           3 Library staff
                           Post doc on soft funding
                           Faculty director
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Nebraska
                     
                        
                           Co-directors between library and faculty
                           Programmer
                           Designer 
                           Faculty fellows
                           Library staff
                           Graduate and undergraduate student research assistants
                        
                     
                  
               


               It is difficult to quantify the number of staff that work in each center. The
                  staff often include parts of librarians’ time and graduate and undergraduate
                  students who work part time on faculty projects, training, and workshops. The
                  number of staff, including students, can ebb and flow over time in response to
                  budgets and priorities. For example, CUNY has had more students in the past but
                  financial issues led to budget cuts and reduced number of students. 

               Some of the centers are very small. At Texas A&M, there are three people
                  listed on the website, a director, associate director, and programmer. Additional
                  grant funding allows for graduate and undergraduate research assistants. Some
                  centers are larger with portions of more library staff’s time. In other cases,
                  bigger hard budgets allow for more permanent staff. At Princeton, their budget
                  allows for six permanent staff with approximately five graduate students as
                  fellows who undertake their own research projects. There are other graduate
                  student fellows who are project based with administrative responsibilities along
                  with several undergraduate students.

               From an administrative perspective, the co-director model with a librarian and
                  faculty member is common. University of Nebraska has been using this model since
                  the center’s inception and Indiana University’s current administrative structure
                  reflects this. Further, the University of Saskatchewan now uses this model after
                  years of a single director/coordinator with their move into the library. There is
                  often release from teaching for the faculty member to serve as director, thus
                  reflecting the amount of time that coordinating a center takes. The director
                  position is often part of the librarian’s job. In contrast, Toronto Metropolitan
                  University does not offer course release to the faculty director. Combined with a
                  part-time project coordinator, this limits the ability of the center to be
                  proactive in support of projects and workshops and its ability to recruit new
                  fellows.
            


            
               Funding

               
                  Budget Components
                  
                     Institution
                     Funding
                  
                  
                     Princeton
                     
                        
                           Hard based budget 
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Indiana University
                     
                        
                           Funding – cash, in-kind, from OVPR, dean, departments, IT Services,
                              libraries
                           Grants
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Northeastern University
                     
                        
                           Hard funds with grant funds to fund new feature development and
                              temporary staff
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     TAMU
                     
                        
                           Staff funding
                           Funds for faculty grants
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Saskatchewan
                     
                        
                           Soft money for programmer
                           Library funded positions
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Hamilton
                     
                        
                           NEH grant funding to start up
                           Commitment of time for co-directors
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Toronto Metropolitan
                     
                        
                           Dean and departments funding
                           Grant funding for RAs
                           Largely soft money and in-kind funding – internal, external
                              grants
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     CUNY
                     
                        
                           Combination of hard and soft funds
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Brown
                     
                        
                           Some base budget with soft funds
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Nebraska
                     
                        
                           Hard and soft funds and in-kind contributions from university
                              stakeholders
                        
                     
                  
               


               Like the case for number of employees, it can be hard to measure funding levels
                  for both cash and in-kind contributions. These centers are funded through a
                  variety of models. At Indiana University, the center was funded initially as an
                  experiment by the university president. The developers were base funded for the
                  first several years but this was not sustainable. As a result, the funding model
                  was changed over time. Now, the operational costs are provided by the Office of
                  the Vice Provost Research along with several National Science Foundation, National
                  Endowment for the Humanities, and other grants. In-kind funding is provided from
                  the library for the library co-director and several graduate research assistants.
                  The College of Arts and Sciences pays for the faculty co-director and two graduate
                  research assistants. As another model, Northeastern shifted from grant funding to
                  base budget but still uses grants to fund new features of development and
                  temporary staff. This model helps reduce staff turnover, improve morale, and focus
                  attention on strategic activities because the center is not continually writing
                  grants for base operations. As a final model, at the University of Nebraska, the
                  center’s founding members, including departments and dean’s office, contributed to
                  it financially. The English department provided funding for the faculty
                  co-director; the library reallocated positions to the center and provided funding
                  for the library co-director; and the dean’s office reconfigured a professor
                  position into a DH position. By grounding the center in these major units, it
                  became harder to dislodge it in financially challenging times. Princeton receives
                  a relatively large base budget from the provost. There are some National Endowment
                  for the Humanities grants but the center does not generally apply for grants to do
                  projects. This means that there is a limit to the number of partners with whom it
                  can work because there is no soft funding. On the other hand, this situation helps
                  with staff recruitment and retention because the center can guarantee permanent
                  positions.


               In contrast, the University of Saskatchewan found that the use of soft,
                  grant-funded dollars meant that the center limped along. This situation led
                  to a crisis point at which point the library stepped in to provide stable funding.
                  Toronto Metropolitan University’s center is also in a position of little base
                  operational funding. It relies primarily on soft money and in-kind contributions
                  with internal and external grants and space, furniture, and computers. It is
                  continually lobbying for some base budget for stability and ability to expand
                  services. CUNY has also found that if it used grant funding for permanent staff
                  positions then it was always writing grants.
            


            
                Factors for Success 

               The interviewees were asked to articulate the key factors that led to the center’s
                  success. These factors focused on champions, partnerships, funding, targeted
                  activities, their virtual and physical space, and the training and mentoring of
                  students.

               Above all else, champions are key. These centers were founded by an individual or
                  small group of people who had a vision for the center’s potential and were able to
                  articulate it and convince partners, stakeholders, and senior administration to
                  invest time and money. In the case of Princeton, the faculty lead saw the future
                  of humanities at the university and convinced partners that a center was needed.
                  In fact, the interviewee from Princeton said that it was hard to overstate the
                  importance of the faculty lead in the center’s success. This individual was able
                  to create strategic relationships and advocate for the center and continue this
                  leadership over time. The center’s director and associate director have been able
                  to create a strong culture where the staff believe in the importance of the work.
                  As Indiana University found, the center struggled when it was effectively
                  leaderless for several years. As a result, the new co-leads spent time rebuilding
                  the program. With other centers, the universities wanted to be seen as an
                  innovator in the area. Northeastern hired a director with a reputation in the
                  community to make this vision a reality. The same was done at Nebraska with a
                  cluster hire which grounded the center in DH research. At Texas A&M, two
                  faculty members wrote a white paper which led to funding for center start up. At
                  University of Saskatchewan, a faculty member wanted space for students to work on
                  their research project. Other researchers became interested and they secured
                  funding to renovate a space and buy equipment. At Toronto Metropolitan, the center
                  grew out of two faculty members’ research projects and slowly over the years more
                  projects became involved. The financial support for the DH center at CUNY came
                  from the Provost, who had an interest in digital initiatives and scholarship.
                  Finally, at Nebraska, the university wanted to invest in areas of excellence and
                  DH was one area with potential to that end. 

               Another factor focused on people, partnerships and institutional support. The
                  interviewee from Princeton stated that they were able to recruit and retain people
                  with key skills and passion for the work. A key partnership was with the library
                  which often provided space and staff as Northeastern found. Saskatchewan also
                  found that working with the library to be critical. By being situated in the
                  library more staff could be accessed and therefore more services offered. The
                  interviewee from Brown echoed this by stating that the move to the library made
                  sense since they became more of a champion and provided access to more staff. It
                  is a natural place for a DH center that supports research since that is what a
                  library does. The center at Northeastern also found that a partnership with
                  another research center was key. This means that the centers’ research agendas
                  supported and complemented each other. Relationships between center staff is also
                  key to success. As the interviewee from Texas A&M articulated, their staff
                  worked well together, were excellent at their jobs, and engaged in their work.
                  Another key to success is engaged faculty who grow to be a critical mass of
                  individuals involved in DH as Saskatchewan determined. The interviewee from
                  Toronto Metropolitan echoed this by articulating that the community is more than
                  just one particular project. 

               These centers were also able to undertake their work with base budgeting with
                  minimal soft money. As the center at Princeton found, the ability to function
                  without soft money meant staff were more easily attracted and retained because
                  they were hired on a permanent basis, as opposed to contracts. It is also a sign
                  that the center had clear institutional support. They could hire smart people with
                  a passion for the work. With base budgets allocated, it means that the grant
                  funding that is secured can be used for new projects, temporary staff, and student
                  positions as Northeastern articulated. As the interviewee from Saskatchewan
                  reflected, soft money does not work and sustainable funding is needed. At
                  Nebraska, each party that support the DH center contributes financial resources
                  and staff time as a sign of their commitment.

               At the same time, the centers were able to set boundaries around the services and
                  supports they were able to provide. They did not try to be all things to all
                  people. The interviewee from Indiana articulated that they were ideally able to
                  use internal offerings to situate themselves for external funding opportunities.
                  With Northeastern, focusing the mandate and services that could be provided meant
                  that there was time to do things well and be able to be a good mentor to students
                  and faculty. As the interviewee from Northeastern recognized, there needs to be
                  constant negotiation when demands exceed capabilities. Texas A&M did comment
                  that they felt that they needed to be everything to everyone, but quickly realized
                  that they needed to focus on center activities to the exclusion of some others. At
                  Saskatchewan, they found that they tried to please everyone at the outset and
                  bought equipment for research that in the end was not undertaken. They found that
                  it would have been better to figure out who the actual users would be and meet
                  their needs first. As the interviewee stated, it is not a matter of build it
                     and they will come. 

               Both virtual and physical space were keys to a center’s success. As Princeton’s
                  center described, the physical space was a place where parties could be hosted and
                  people from across faculties could talk. At Saskatchewan, the physical space
                  created community. Toronto Metropolitan also has dedicated space in the library
                  with workstations and small meeting space. In Nebraska the library was seen as a
                  neutral space where people interact and have interdisciplinary conversations.

               Finally, the centers saw as one of their key functions the ability to train and
                  mentor undergraduate and graduate students and early career scholars such as
                  postdoctoral fellows to become the next generation of digital humanities scholars
                  who got jobs and accepted into graduate programs. It was an opportunity to
                  transform lives of the participating students as the interviewee from Princeton
                  expressed. This was echoed by Northeastern which recognized that students benefit
                  from the DH experience. Further, CUNY saw them as ambassadors for DH. At
                  Princeton, one of the postdoctoral fellows is responsible for teaching an
                  undergraduate course in DH, thus bringing DH into the classroom. At Indiana, by
                  incorporating DH into the classroom, research skills and projects by students and
                  faculty could be developed. These training opportunities often meant providing
                  time and space for students to work with faculty members. This includes the summer
                  incubator at Indiana which had six slots – three for faculty and three for
                  students. These individuals were paired together and worked to develop a working
                  prototype over the course of a one-week intensive session. Further, the Indiana
                  center recognized the skills and expertise that students were developing with a
                  title of method specialist. 
            

            
               Challenges

               While these centers found many benefits and advantages to operating as centers,
                  there were many challenges. For example, operating without base budgets meant that
                  partnerships, staff, and projects are limited in nature. Toronto Metropolitan
                  realized that they are constrained in what they can do since they are not base
                  funded. Unlike other centres, there is no course release for the director. The
                  interviewee sees base funding allocation as a concrete sign of institutional
                  support. The center at Princeton realized that they needed a particular expertise
                  on staff but were not able to hire for it because there was no money in the
                  budget. At Saskatchewan, when the center lost a soft funded staff person, it
                  created a crisis point where either the center shut down or someone took it over.
                  At that point, the library stepped in and took responsibility for it and
                  consequently was able to provide more services. However, in CUNY’s experience,
                  base budgeting does not protect a center from financial cuts as dictated by the
                  institution. Budget cuts then impacted the number of students who could be
                  supported by the center. The budget is further impacted by the fact that
                  universities cannot often pay technical staff enough in comparison to private
                  sector wages as the center at Nebraska found.

               There is also the constant struggle around staffing. For some it is determining
                  the right number of staff. In Northeastern’s experience, too small and the center
                  risks missing key skills and expertise. Of course, growing too fast presents its
                  own challenges. Northeastern grew by 50% over the past year and needed to find
                  ways to do this in an effective way. In other cases, reliance on students means
                  high turnover and working around their course work and dissertations. CUNY has
                  found that there is always a feeling of retraining. At Nebraska, staff often find
                  themselves spread thin and there is a need for additional people to lessen the
                  stress. And of course, the time required to run these centers is intensive and
                  often takes more time than allocated in a job description. The interviewee from
                  Indiana was allocated approximately 50% of their job to the center but the work
                  often bleeds over that time allotment. 
            

            
               Discussion

               Given the small sample size for this study, it is hard to generalize about DH/DS
                  centers. However, some preliminary conclusions can be made. First, these centers
                  show characteristics of many similar ones . These
                  centers offer a common range of activities and services with a combination of
                  people, including researchers, librarians, technologists, students, postdoctoral
                  fellows, and infrastructure, ranging from hardware, software and training . However, they do not offer everything under the
                     sun but rather have found that it is important to set boundaries around
                  services and activities offered, complimenting that which is offered in other
                  parts of campus . Funding often comes from the
                  library, speaking to their active roles in these centers . They also get budgets from a variety of places
                  including academic departments, university administrative offices, grants, and
                  endowments , ,
                     . Ultimately, these centers are linked to their
                  institution’s goals and mission , .

               Having said this, it is clear that each center is unique and shaped by its context
                     . Some centers, such as Saskatchewan,
                  Princeton and Toronto Metropolitan, started in response to a faculty member’s
                  research projects . These individuals played a key role
                  as champion for their center , . For some, this means that they are part of the
                  library and offer services to more than students and researchers based in the
                  humanities. This includes the centers at Hamilton, Northeastern, Saskatchewan and
                  Brown. Others, such as Princeton, Toronto Metropolitan, and Texas A&M, are
                  based in a faculty or department, even if they are still physically situated in
                  the library. Further, other centers are a combination of the library and faculty
                  as is the case with Indiana and Nebraska. This organizational structure is
                  reflected in the co-director model with someone from the library and someone from
                  the faculty serving as directors, representing these important stakeholders . Finally, given the nature of the institution,
                  CUNY’s center is free standing within the graduate center. 

               The differences between the centers can also be found in the funding envelopes.
                  Some are funded through substantial base budgets from provost offices as is the
                  case with Princeton and CUNY. This reflects the support that can come from senior
                  administration. Other centers have hybrid funding models with cash and in-kind
                  budgets flowing from the library, faculty and departments. This includes Nebraska
                  and Indiana and demonstrates a broad base support for DH/DS at the institution.
                  Another funding model focuses on base budgets from libraries like the case of
                  Northeastern which reinforces the role of the library as a home for these centers.
                  There is some evidence to suggest that those centers based in or associated with
                  libraries might be in the best financial position 
                  and have more stability and ability to plan long term .
                  Finally, while it enjoys cash and in-kind funding for its activities, Toronto
                  Metropolitan is an example of a center that has not be able to convert this
                  support to permanent, ongoing funding. It continues to lobby for this and is
                  hopeful that it will come.

               These centers’ experiences speak to the importance of strong leadership during
                  start up and operations. For example, the center at Indiana was almost leaderless
                  for several years which meant that it struggled. It is now back on surer
                     feet with a co-director model between the library and faculty. People with
                  vision are needed to start a center, drive the process, and secure funding and
                  administrative support 
                  , . They are able to
                  gather together important stakeholders, often found among those already doing
                  DH/DS at the institution, and funding. These partnerships and collaboration are
                  important to create shared ownership and investment . The Toronto Metropolitan interviewee stated that
                  by doing this, the stakeholders would be able to help each other out and express a
                  common focus for the center. It is important that this vision be articulated for a
                  broad audience. For example, Nebraska posted a document that outlined the ways in
                  which the center was started and built on efforts already present at the
                  university . Among these were decisions to make
                  cluster hires in DH to broaden the research focus in the area on campus. Drs. Ives
                  and Earheart  wrote a white paper for the purpose of
                  establishing a DH center at Texas A&M which led to funds to start a center.
                  Efforts such as these gain support from senior administration who also have their
                  own vision for a center. Often, it is because they want the university to be seen
                  as leaders in DH/DS. Northeastern brought in the present director to build the
                  center and quickly establish a presence in digital humanities and scholarship.
                  Advantages to strong leadership exist. In particular, it can mean that the center
                  is better able to survive the inevitable transitions of people and mandate . However, this is not always guaranteed as is the case
                  for Hamilton where the center’s mandate and structure changed when senior
                  management turned over. Ultimately, strong relationships with administration are
                  needed along with financial backing and political capital . Otherwise, as the Toronto Metropolitan
                  interviewee expressed, it is a lot of work with few benefits.

               The interviewees also expressed the importance and advantages of at least some
                  base budget with minimal reliance of grant funding. At the best case, a center
                  would not be in the position of Toronto Metropolitan where it is continually
                  asking for funds and writing grants. Of course, these centers feel that they could
                  always use more funding to hire staff and undertake more activities. With
                  additional funds, Toronto Metropolitan would be able to make the center
                  coordinator position full-time which would mean that the center could undertake
                  more outreach and project support. In Princeton’s case, they would hire a
                  communication person. One advantage of some base budget is the ability to hire
                  permanent staff which is good for morale. It also addresses some of the challenges
                  of attracting and retaining staff when private sector salaries are often higher
                     , , .

               In terms of human resources, these centers tended to start small and offered
                  services that could be supported by the staff and expertise available . While they could not often offer competitive
                  salaries and a clear career path for many staff ,
                     , they could offer non-monetary rewards such as
                  time for independent research projects, space, titles, professional development
                  opportunities, new skill and knowledge development, and flexible work , , , . There are also
                  clear advantages to undergraduate and graduate students working in the centers,
                  offering training and working on faculty research projects . As these centers found, they gained valuable
                  skills and employment and opportunities for further training after graduation.
                  However, this reliance on students comes at a potential cost with constant
                  turnover . CUNY experiences this and finds that they
                  are continually training new students. In terms of leadership, while there are
                  advantages to a focus of one faculty member as a guiding force over a long period
                  of time, a center needs to be able to transition to new leadership .
            

            
               Conclusion

               In conclusion, these ten centers are examples of ones which have successfully
                  supported the faculty, staff, and students on their campuses. Their experiences
                  provide insight into some of the primary services offered, staffing, funding, key
                  factors for success and challenges and suggest some important implications for
                  those wishing to start their own center. These results compliment the case studies
                  highlighted above and reports on center start up written by other DH/DS centers
                     , .

               First, it is important to have champions at the faculty, library and senior
                  administration levels who can articulate a vision for the center and develop the
                  important partnerships and collaborations needed to start and sustain a center.
                  They need to collaborate with stakeholders, such as the library, other research
                  centers, faculties and departments, and researchers, whose goals and objectives
                  align with the center’s. As  articulates,
                  collaborative efforts are needed both within the center itself and with its
                  partners. Part of the partnership building can be conducting an environmental scan
                  and needs assessment to determine what is needed, what is available and who is
                  interested in participating in the center . This
                  information can be used to carefully evaluate the types of services, activities
                  and programs which will be offered by the center. As these centers have found, it
                  is often useful to start small and grow organically and not try to do everything
                  at once.

               Second, in terms of budget, some level of base budget is beneficial. It provides
                  certainty of funding from year to year and allows the center to hire permanent
                  staff. These interviewees caution heavy reliance on grants. They can be useful for
                  new programming and experiments, but one might find themselves in a cycle of
                  always needing to write grant applications.

               Third, graduate and undergraduate students and postdoctoral fellows are valuable
                  resources for these centers and should be a part of any DH/DS center. There are
                  many benefits to their involvement. They help advance faculty research, teach
                  workshops and courses on DH/DS, provide project management in some cases and other
                  activities. Just as importantly, the students and postdoctoral fellows gain
                  valuable skills and expertise which leads to employment and further studies. The
                  centers play an important role growing the next generation of humanities scholars
                  and researchers.

               Of course, these implications for practice are not magic formulas for DH/DS center
                  start up and operations, but rather smart practices gleaned from the experience of
                  ten centers with many years successful operation supported by case studies and
                  other research. They provide guidance to those who are investigating the
                  possibilities of a DH/DS on their campus or looking to revitalize existing
                  centers.
            
         
