Title:  From the Personal to the Proprietary: Conceptual Writing's
               Critique of Metadata
Volume:  006
Issue:  2
Date:  16 August 2012
Abstract:  
            The past decade has seen a remarkable proliferation of new works of constrained and
               appropriated writing that prominently incorporate, and in turn investigate, metadata
               schemes. I argue that these works ought to be of considerable interest not only to
               critics of contemporary avant-garde writing — but also to media theorists, librarians
               and textual scholars. By emphasizing classification protocols, conceptual writing
               makes an implicit case for the interrelationship of these fields. Each of the four
               main books under discussion here — Tan Lin’s Seven Controlled
                  Vocabularies, Craig Dworkin’s Perverse
                  Library, M. Nourbese Philip’s Zong! and Simon
               Morris’ Getting Inside Jack Kerouac’s Head — draws upon
               pre-existing textual archives. In doing so, these books suggest that processes of
               data storage, classification and transmission are key to how poetry is created,
               recognized and disseminated. Conceptual writing’s attention to information
               classification protocols offers not only a critique of contemporary models of
               authorship, but also of contemporary frameworks of personal agency and intellectual
               property. 
         
Full Body Text: 
From the Personal to the Proprietary: Conceptual Writing’s Critique of
            Metadata

            
               In the past one hundred years, people in all lines of work have
                  jointly constructed an incredible, interlocking set of categories, standards, and
                  means for interoperating infrastructural technologies. We hardly know what we have
                  built. No one is in control of infrastructure; no one has the power centrally to
                  change it. To the extent that we live in, on, and around this new infrastructure,
                  it helps form the shape of our moral, scientific, and esthetic choices.
                  Infrastructure is now the great inner space.
               
            
         

            
               The estrangement of schemata and classifications from the data
                  subsumed beneath them, indeed the sheer quantity of the material processed…has
                  become quite incommensurable with the horizons of individual experience.
               
            
         
We are, it could be said, in the midst of a metadata revolution. By the term
               metadata revolution, I mean to describe the extraordinary proliferation
            of powerful online catalogues and finding tools. The most obvious player in the metadata
            revolution would be Google, but in a larger sense most current media distribution
            platforms — Amazon, eBay, Facebook, iTunes, Mediafire, Pirate Bay, Youtube, library.nu —
            operate as gigantic catalogs. We have entered into a new age of cataloging and data
            aggregation at every level of society: governments, corporations, universities and
            individuals have access to unprecedented quantities of data, and they require metadata
            to access, classify, and prioritize that data. The effects of the metadata revolution
            are too complex to detail here; without doing full justice to the concept of a metadata
            revolution, this paper examines recent works of conceptual writing which foreground
            questions of classification. In what follows I hope to show that conceptual writing
            ought to be of interest to media theorists, librarians and textual scholars — as well as
            to critics of contemporary avant-garde writing. By emphasizing classification protocols,
            conceptual writing makes an implicit case for the interrelationship of these fields.
            Each of the four main books under discussion here — Tan Lin’s Seven
               Controlled Vocabularies, Craig Dworkin’s Perverse
               Library, M. Nourbese Philip’s Zong! and Simon
            Morris’ Getting Inside Jack Kerouac’s Head — draws upon
            pre-existing textual archives. In doing so, these books suggest that processes of data
            storage, classification and transmission are key to how poetry is created, recognized
            and disseminated. This essay argues that conceptual writing’s attention to information
            classification protocols offers not only a critique of contemporary models of
            authorship, but also of contemporary frameworks of personal agency and intellectual
            property.
The past decade has seen a remarkable proliferation of new works of constrained and
            appropriated writing that prominently incorporate, and in turn investigate, metadata schemes.
                offers a useful overview of classification protocols in
               relation to contemporary combinatorial literature, in particular emphasizing the
               writing of Georges Perec. Many (if not most) of these works depend on internet
            sources for their content — even if the works themselves for the most part have
            culminated in print rather than digital works. Marjorie Perloff (who in other contexts
            has been supportive of digital poetries) has recently written: 
               E-poetry never quite got off the ground, the compositional process of an e-poem
                  (however much animation might be used) not being essentially different from that
                  of a normal print poem.
               The revolution that soon occurred was not in writing for the computer screen but
                  writing in an environment of hyperinformation, an environment, moreover, where we
                  were all authors. 
               
            
         
Notwithstanding her abrupt dismissal of e-poetry, Perloff makes an important observation
            about what she calls poetry by other means in the new
               century. This new poetry takes much of its content, as well as many of its
            constraints, from the environment of hyperinformation. Even
            if it does not take the end form of e-poetry (the designation is
            problematically general and already sounds obsolete), conceptual poetry relies heavily
            on recent technologies such as email, blogs, Facebook, search engines, Twitter, iPad
            apps and data visualization programs.For a selected bibliography of recent
               conceptual writing, see the appendix to . See also Against Expression
                as well as Poetry
               Magazine’s Flarf and Conceptual Writing special
               feature . As selected examples of the remediation
               phenomena I am describing, Noah Eli Gordon’s Inbox is
               composed entirely of emails ; Mathew Timmons’ The New Poetics and Fitterman’s Now We
                  Are Friends both draw on Facebook 
               ; Now We Are Friends also
               features sampled tweets; Derek Beaulieu’s Flatland: A Romance of
                  Many Dimensions reduces Edmund Abbott’s novel of the same name to a series
               of vectors on the page . Much of this writing is
            profoundly self-conscious of processes of remediation and transcoding. Collectively
            these works demonstrate a distinct fascination among poets with the organization of knowledge.
         
The most widely cited definition of metadata — data about data — is clearly
            inadequate: information could be said to be data about data.The term metadata is
               used vaguely in a range of new media contexts. Mark Amerika’s collection META/DATA: A Digital Poetics, for instance, makes no attempt
               to define the term, nor does it make reference to poetics in relation to
               poetry or poetic language . In information
            theoretical terms, data is the most basic form of signification — thus any organized
            data could be construed as metadata. If we qualify our definition, as the OED does, by requiring that metadata be a
               set of data that describes and gives information about other data, then we
            come closer to a useful definition. In the collection Introduction
               to Metadata, Anna Gilliland suggests that a useful,
                  big picture way of thinking about metadata is as the sum total of what one
               can say about an information object at any level of aggregation, and she
            defines an information object as anything that can be addressed and manipulated as a discrete entity by a human being
               or an information system
            . According to the recent volume Metadata and Semantics, Metadata can be
               defined as structure data about an object that supports some function(s) related to
               that object described, achieving a degree of uniformity in description by means of
               schemas. Metadata schemas are structured representations of information for a given
               use or domain….
            . Although metadata is typically associated with
            digital artifacts, the term need not be restricted to digital contexts. According to
            Stephen Ramsay, [T]he seeds of the modern computerized database
               [are] fully evident in the many text-based taxonomies and indexing systems which have
               been developed since the Middle Ages. Whenever humanists have amassed enough
               information to make retrieval (or comprehensive understanding) cumbersome,
               technologists of whatever epoch have sought to put forth ideas about how to represent
               that information in some more tractable form. 
            
         
As tractable as those forms may be, they are never value-free. Johanna Drucker has
            recently written that metadata schemes must be read as models of
               knowledge, as discursive instruments that bring the object of their inquiry into
               being, shaping the fields in which they operate by defining quite explicitly what can
               and cannot be said about the objects of a particular collection or online
               environment
            .
Analogues to a number of claims made in this paper can be found in recent writing on
            data visualization, and in particular within Lev Manovich’s influential notion of
               the database logic of new media .Manovich’s model of the database logic of new media claim has
               elicited considerable critical commentary. See, for instance, Victoria Vesna’s
               collection Database Aesthetics
               , and in particular Weinbren’s essay Ocean, Database, Recut
               . Expanding upon Manovich’s account,
            Mitchell Whitelaw’s essay Art Against Information: Case Studies in
               Data Practice argues:Manovich suggests that one of the
               roles of data art is to reflect on data subjectivity; I would go further and say that
               data art is involved in the construction of that subjectivity…. It pulls us away from
               information, from the well-formed messages that dominate our experience of digital
               media. 
            
         
Conceptual writing similarly asks us to reflect upon, as well as reconstruct, patterns
            of data subjectivity. Poetry, as the literary genre linked most closely to
            expressions of direct, authentic subjectivity, presents a particularly rich forum
            for exploring the construction of personhood. Metadata has an important role to play in
            Whitelaw’s account of the potential of data art to reconfigure notions of subjectivity:
               By directing us instead towards data, [data art] opens spaces for
               potential, for the distributed reconstruction of information. Yet in the process it
               invariably encodes its own metadata — data about data — that can be read out through
               the artists’ processes, as this paper has demonstrated. This metadata must in turn
               inform us as data subjects, if we are to move past immersion and navigation to a more
               critical, and active, agency. 
            
         
Whitelaw offers an optimistic appraisal of data art, and I believe much the same could
            be said of conceptual writing. All of the works surveyed in this essay thematize in some
            manner the relation of the writer to a data set, and these works raise important
            questions concerning privacy, authenticity and identity. These works are not
            necessarily, for the most part, directly prescriptive of social change. They could even
            be said to take the form of parodic compendia — substituting reclassification and
            remediation for direct expression. 
The title of Kenneth Goldsmith and Craig Dworkin’s Against
               Expression
             suggests an outright rejection of traditional notions of
            poetic sincerity and lyric confession — or what is often described as the individual
            poetic voice. This rejection of expression is clearly aimed at the creative
            writing establishment — as an overarching rubric, however, it is somewhat misleading.
            The writings of Goldsmith and Dworkin themselves (as I have argued elsewhere) are often
            surprisingly personal.See Stephens, Self-Portrait in a
                  Context Mirror
               . Perloff suggests that Paradoxically, this new citational and often constraint bound poetry — a poetry as
               visually and sonically formalized as it is semantically charged — is more accessible,
               and in a sense, personal than was the Language poetry of twenty years
               earlier
            . Conceptual writing acknowledges its debt to
            Language poetry, and, like Language poetry, attempts a critique of a naturalized poetic
            voice. But the critique is not so much of expression per
            se, as it is of either the naturalization or the
               industrialization of expression. Language poets of the 1970s challenged
            direct poetic expression at the level of syntax, arguing that even poetic language was
            inherently ideological.See for instance The L=A=N=G=U=A=G=E
                  Book
                or Ron Silliman’s The New
                  Sentence
               . Conceptual writing continues that critique of
            poetry as direct expression, but it does so with a new awareness of the extraordinary
            changes brought about by digital technologies in the past two decades.
Many of the practices explored in this essay have their origins in 1960s conceptual
               art.For overviews of 1960s conceptual art’s relationship to information
               technology, see  and .
            Dan Graham’s 1966 Poem-Schema, its creator claimed, defines itself in place only as information
            . The writings of Vito Acconci, Lawrence Weiner, Lucy
            Lippard, Sol Lewitt and others could be cited as exemplifying conceptual art’s interest
            in information technologies and the representation of raw data.
            What is different about conceptual writing of the past ten years — according to
            proponents including Perloff, Goldsmith, Dworkin, Fitterman and Place — is (in
            Goldsmith’s words), the sheer quantity of language
             made available by the emergence of the
            Internet. Digital media, according to Goldsmith, has set the stage for a literary revolution
            . Whether or not Goldsmith’s rhetoric is
            hyperbolic, conceptual writing exists in a kind of dialectical tension with recent
            developments in information technology — depending on improvements in information
            storage and dissemination for much of its content, and yet at the same time remaining
            attached to the print book as its dominant vehicle.

            Against the Proprietary
            
               
                  Poetry, like the affective system, is a medium punctuated by
                     couplings and a few meta data tags.
                  
               
            
            Tan Lin’s cumbersomely titled book Seven Controlled Vocabularies
                  and Obituary 2004. The Joy of Cooking
                features the term metadata twice on its cover, as well as
               all of its cataloguing data including its call number (Figure
                  1). Of particular interest is the book’s Library of Congress
               Cataloguing-in-Publication Data, which offers fourteen possible subject headings.
               Lin’s headings force us to ask questions of categorization related to nationality,
               genre and language before we have encountered a single image or blurb. As he
               describes the cover in an interview, 
                  it has metadata layers for bibliographic control. The LCSH is
                     an old-fashioned thesaurus, and 7CV references
                     dictionaries and other classification/reading systems. Subject headings are
                     conflict prone near ethnicity/identity issues, and I tried to highlight that
                     with China-Poetry as a disappearing first term.
                  
                The overall effect of the cover is that the clichés of the poetry book and of
               the poetic persona are subverted in advance of our encountering any of Lin’s poetry,
               much of which consists of appropriated texts and images.
            
               Front and back covers, 
               
               
            
            Lin describes his work as an ambient poetics, about
               which he writes 
                  [Today] a work architecture [or film] or [poem] or [novel]
                     should have as fluid and standardized an ID [OBJECT ID™ SYSTEM] as possible and
                     function like a waiting area, time slot, universal market/currency or metadata
                     standard
                  
               . Lin is clearly mocking the rhetoric of genre hybridity, but he is also
               pointing out that in an era of media convergence, poetry, while it may evade a
               specific use value, is still implicated with homogenizing systems of distribution and
               classification. Lin’s ambient poetics acknowledges its place with a hypermediated
               society, and yet attempts to resist being instrumentalized in the interests of any
               single cause or subject matter. For Lin, A book should be the
                  weakest information pattern that is visible to the eye. Only in that way can it
                  outlive its data
               . A book is, of course, in many ways one of the
               strongest information patterns with which we are familiar — compared to electronic
               documents, the book is a relatively stable artifact. By emphasizing the metadata
               protocols of the book as physical object, Lin subverts the unit of the poetry book,
               and by extension places poetry within a far wider discursive field. That field also
               extends beyond American Written English, as well as beyond categories such as Asian
               American and Chinese American. Lin has even made a Google translation of Seven Controlled Vocabularies available on lulu.com. No
               pretense is made of it being an authoritative cross-cultural document. Lin’s output
               over the past several years has been prodigious: there are a number of companion
               volumes to Seven Controlled Vocabularies: an entire
                  Appendix volume, a critical reader, a book of blurbs,
               a book of mini-essays, and even a handmade book. Lin has made collaboration a key
               feature of his work — in the EDIT: Processing Network
                  Publishing event at Penn in which Lin participated last year, for
               instance, different media technologies were employed to produce work on site. One
               product (or byproduct perhaps) of the event was the volume (available as a pdf and as
               a Lulu print-on-demand book) Selected Essays About a
                  Bibliographyedited by Danny Snelson. The book features mini-essays by
               nearly fifty contributors; among the contributions are two essays titled Metadata. One essay, credited to Kareem Estefan, simply
               reprints the definition provided by the National Information Standards Organization.
               The other essay, by Dan Visel, explores paratexts, such as book covers, as forms of
               metadata. According to Visel, A book is not a text. It’s more
                  than a text. It’s a text and a collection of information around that text, some of
                  which we consciously recognize and some of which we don’t
               . This description captures well the radically open-ended
               nature of Lin’s project.
            Lin’s 2007 book Heath: plagiarism/outsource, Notes Towards the
                  Definition of Culture, Untilted[sic] Heath Ledger
                  Project, a history of the search engine, disco OS is a particularly rich
               text in terms of exploring issues of intellectual property within a global
               marketplace for ideas. From Dada to Situationism to conceptual writing, appropriation
               practices have long presented an overt critique of intellectual
                  property.Textual appropriation strategies have received enormous critical
                  attention in recent years. See in particular Bourriard, Fitterman, Goldsmith and
                  Perloff, as well as the recent collection Appropriation
                  . Copyright’s influence on twentieth- and twenty-first
                  century literary production has also received considerable attention: see Boon,
                  Lessig and Saint-Amour in particular. Appropriation reconfigures source
               material and yet typically a residue (or metadata layer) of the source
                  remains.For more on the complexities of metadata in relation to computer
                  files and data storage, see .
               Though many of Lin’s practices have a long lineage, they are also very much enmeshed
               in the present. His appropriations tend not to be nostalgic or historical, and they
               tend to be extraordinarily self-reflexive with regard to remediation. As a whole,
               they go far to enact Marcus Boon’s recent advocacy of copying as an ethical practice.
               For Boon,
            What the internet offers is not so much new forms of economy,
               production, and exchange, (although the open source movement has certainly made
               efforts in those directions), but the opportunity to render visible once more the
               instability of all the terms and structures which hold together existing intellectual
               property regimes, and to point to the madness of modern, capitalist framings of
               property. 
            
            In a sign of the times, Boon’s book is being given away as a free pdf on the Harvard
               University Press website. Like much of Lin’s work, Boon enacts, as well as theorizes,
               a critique of an intellectual property system replete with contradictions.As a
                  number of commentators have noted, many iconic works of twentieth-century
                  literature (such as Ulysses, The
                     Cantos and The Waste Land) would be
                  difficult, if not impossible, to publish under current copyright laws. See in
                  particular Saint-Amour 2011 and McLeod and Kuenzli 2011. Literary genre, it should
                  be noted in passim, plays a key role in determining copyright
                  protection: thus to the courts it makes a significant difference how one
                  classifies a literary work, as poetry or prose, as parody, etc.
            
         

            Possessive Cases: The Metadata Protocols of The Perverse
                  Library and Zong!
            
            Craig Dworkin’s The Perverse Library purports to list
               the contents of Dworkin’s library, as well as to list books he wishes were in his
               library . The book comprises a bibliography of 2,247
               works, as well as a remarkable forty-page introduction entitled Pinacographic Space. Pinacography, or the compiling of lists, derives
               from the Pinakes, or tables of learning, compiled by Callimachus
               at the library of Alexandria. According to Alex Wright, in his Glut: Mastering Information Through the Ages, this
                  elementary bibliographic constituted the first systematic abstraction of
                  metadata
               . Dworkin offers an exhaustive description of his
               library, but at the same time his entire project recognizes the difficulties of
               classifying and describing a physical library. The book includes two bibliographies,
                  A Perverse Library and The
                  Perverse Library — the difference between the definite and indefinite
               article presumably denoting books the author would like to own as opposed to those
               the author actually does own. Dworkin’s fundamental classificatory choice is to group
               his books by publisher. He acknowledges that he has not provided a complete
               bibliography of his library — many titles, particularly those of mainstream
               publishers, are excluded. The effect of this is to present the reader with an
               extraordinary cornucopia of recent avant-garde writing.
            There is something of a voyeuristic show-and-tell feel to a personal pinacography —
               perhaps that is part of what Dworkin means by the perversity of the project. On the
               one hand, many of the likely readers of this book will look for books they own or
               have written. On the other hand, this book has induced me to buy a number of books I
               otherwise would not have, and in this sense the book could be said to have a
               strikingly direct effect on its readers. Dworkin hardly mentions electronic
               publication in his introduction, but it is clearly a specter haunting the book.
               Dworkin is no technophobe, and has made much of his library available online at his
               Eclipse website. He has even extensively theorized his own practices as an online
                  archivist.See 
                In some sense, The Perverse Library shows that
               no amount of metadata can stand in for the sensory data of physical books. The book
               could almost be taken as a refutation of Goldsmith’s If it isn’t on the internet,
                  it doesn’t exist — except that ironically the maxim almost holds true in that
               almost all of these books are online, in the sense that it is possible to find
               instantaneous metadata, including prices and library access information, about nearly
               all of these titles. 
            
            Dworkin both celebrates and laments the physical space taken up by the library. He
               insists his project is an architectural one, a documentation not simply of the
               library’s textual contents, but also an account of its materiality. In his
               introduction, Dworkin engages in an extended excursus on the olfactory aspects of his
               library — a form of sense data seldom recorded bibliographically. The catalog
               presents us with a paradox — it makes information accessible, but it also deforms it
               through reducing it to fixed categories. Dworkin’s book could be the most compelling
               single volume account of small-press Anglo-American poetry publishing over the past
               few decades, and yet it does not contain a single image. Despite its seeming
               copiousness, it is a radically reduced representation of these objects and those
               persons and institutions that produced them. The title suggests a sexualized relation
               of the bibliophile to his books, but etymologically the word perverse — in the
               sense of through verse — could also be considered entirely appropriate
               to a poetry library. 
            M. Nourbese Philip’s Zong!
                takes on a more serious topic than either The Perverse Libraryor Seven Controlled
                  Vocabularies. Zong! retells — or refuses to
               retell — the story of the Zong, a slave ship from which 150 slaves were thrown
               overboard in 1781 so that its owners could collect insurance money. A lawyer by
               training, Philip derives much of the nearly 200-page book from the two page text of
               the Gregson v. Gilbert decision. Derive may be too
               strong a verb, however, since Zong! is more of a dérive
               than a derivation, which its author describes as a kind of recombinant antinarrative
               . Philip describes locking herself 
                  into this particular discursive landscape in the belief
                     that…the story that can only be told by not telling, is locked in this
                     text
                  
               . In effect, Philip rewrites the Zong! narrative
               by reordering the categories upon which the case was based. The
                  law, she writes, uses language as a tool for
                  ordering… I want poetry to disassemble the ordered, to create disorder and mayhem
                  so as to release the story
               .
            
               Zong! is a fantastically complex multi-generic work that
               I can only begin to describe in this essay — what I want to note are the book’s
               formal features and how they relate to questions of metadata and classification. The
               first Zong! (Figure 2) is
               one of 26 in the first chapter, suggesting an alphabetic microcosm of fragmentation
               and erasure.
            
               
                  Zong! page 3
               
            
            At the bottom of the page, significantly, are names of the victims chosen by Philip;
               none of the slaves’ actual names were ever recorded. As if to undermine any notion of
               a possible point of origin for the story, the first three letters of the poem are
               www, suggesting world wide web, and yet these three w’s remain in a kind of
               proto-semantic state, not syntactically subordinated, referring to no one or no thing
               directly. The words that do rise off the page are monosyllabic, often are fillers or
               homonymic, signs perhaps of dysfluency or of being heard by a non-English speaker or
               even perhaps of being heard from below deck or from below the sea:
                  our/go/goo/oh/one/won/dey/ah/ay/day s.
            
            Philip describes the composition of Zong! as the product
               of a number of serendipitous events, among which she lists her laser printer for no apparent reason print[ing] the first two or three pages [of
                  one section] superimposed on each other — crumped, so to speak — so that the page
                  becomes a dense landscape of text
               . Philip claims that the laser printer did this
               to the beginning of each movement of the second part of the
                  book…the same thing happens
               . So far as I can tell, however, only in the
               Ebora chapter (Figure 3) does the malfunctioning laser
               printer produce a palimpsestic overwritten text.
            
               
                  Zong! from page 177 [light grey font in
                  original]
               
            
            Many of Zong!’s sections demonstrate an extraordinary
               care and precision in terms of typography and layout. The book uses multiple fonts,
               for instance, including a cursive script. It would seem that Philip exaggerates the
               effects of her printer’s presumed malfunction. Philip’s printer introduces what
               Benzon calls the standardization of error into the text
               of Zong!. The malfunctioning printer resists the
               protocols of a clean, direct presentation of text. Writing of Andy Warhol’s Aa: A Novel, Benzon suggests that 
                  At both the microscopic and the macroscopic levels, the
                     systematization of textual production that inhered in the typewriter and
                     elsewhere in the office influenced writing and reversed its effects
                  
               . It is perhaps more difficult to introduce serendipitous errors into computer
               texts than typescripts, and it would seem even more difficult to encounter such
               errors in works which are extensively copyedited for publication. According to
               Benzon, Each typed document, each piece in the massive archive
                  of postwar corporate discourse, is a unique record of an individual sequence of
                  body-machine interfaces and technological inscriptions
               . Philip’s printer performs a kind of violence
               upon the page, crumping it — but it also leaves a trace of the author’s engagement
               with technologies of textual production. It is worth noting that The Perverse Library also thematizes the role of error in its
               introduction, and that Getting Inside Jack Kerouac’s
                  Head, while it does not explicitly thematize error, seems to go to great
               lengths to eliminate errors.
            
               Zong! ends with a glossary and imagined ship’s manifest.
               As opposed to the constrained English vocabulary of the court decision, Philip offers
               a cosmopolitan list of words from other languages likely to have been used onboard.
               She also provides a manifest which lists eleven African Groups
                  and Languages, a list of animals, a list of body parts, crew members, and
               food and drink. The least likely categories on the manifest are nature and
                  women who wait. These lists undermine the well-known opposition suggested
               by Manovich between database and narrative, in that the lists tell a story of
               horrific absurdity and mistaken classification . Zong! also could be said to resist the general current of
               recent scholarship on lists — found in books such as Umberto Eco’s Infinity of Lists
                or Robert Belknap’s The List: The Uses
                  and Pleasures of Cataloguing
                — which tends to celebrate the plenitude of objects
               recorded in lists, and which tends to skirt difficult questions of property and
               identity.
            
               Zong! and The Perverse
                  Library both prominently feature what might be called negative listing — that is to say that their lists are as much about loss
               and misclassification as they are about possession and appropriation. Zong! re-enacts wrongful classification at the same time
               that it reconstructs the languages, names, and possessions of those whose history has
               otherwise been erased. The Perverse Library repeatedly
               invokes the burning (or purported burning) of the Library of Alexandria.See
                     , whose essay on the destruction of the
                  Library of Alexandria provides a central touchstone for The
                     Perverse Library’s introduction. The list becomes a metadata
               substitute for unobtainable objects and for information that cannot be processed.
               Italo Calvino remarks of Georges Perec — perhaps the most famous compiler of
               avant-garde literary lists — that for him Terminological
                  exactitude was his way of possessing things. Perec collected and gave a name to
                  whatever comprises the uniqueness of every event, person, or thing
               . The reverse process may also be possible,
               however. Clark Coolidge writes in his aggregative prose poem Mine: it’s this insane listing that keeps you from
                  ever possessing anything
               . Lists can mark absences also, as for instance
               in Maya Lin’s 1981 Vietnam Memorial, which arranges the names of the dead not
               alphabetically but chronologically by date of death. According to Belknap, In the inventory, words representing names or things are collected
                  by a conceptual principle
               . The formal organization of lists and
               inventories suggests order and coherency, but that organization can also display the
               injustices of classifications based on flawed conceptual principles.
            
               Please Enter Your Personal Data
               Simon Morris’ Getting Inside Kerouac’s Head presents
                  an exemplary instance of a conceptual work that operates by means of remediation
                  and reclassification. The work began as a blog (Figure
                     4) in which Morris retyped the entirety of On the
                     Road in 298 days . It was then published in
                  book form by Information as Material (Figure 5) . Pictured on the cover in the roles of Neal Cassady and
                  Kerouac are Morris and his comrade-in-arms Nicholas Thurston. The cover would seem
                  to emphasize the enduring power of male friendship.For more on masculinity
                     and male friendship in mid-century American literature, see Davidson’s Guys Like Us
                     , which incidentally also features a photo of Neal
                     Cassady and Jack Kerouac together on its cover. The cover invites a
                  simple transposition from Jack and Neal (or Ray and Cody) to Nick and Simon.
                  Thurston is listed as the book’s editor, but it remains unclear what this entails,
                  given that the project would seem not to require editing (although as I suggest
                  below, it likely did require extensive proofing). While Getting Inside Jack Kerouac’s Head may seem like a relatively simple
                  appropriation project of minor interest to literary scholars, the book raises a
                  number of important issues related to the production and reception of contemporary
                  texts. Morris does not purport to have written anything personal or expressive,
                  and yet the variables chosen for his project speak volumes about his intent.
               
                  
               
               
                  Information as Material
                  
               
               
                  2010 Penguin (UK edition)
                  
               
               
                  Penguin (UK edition), 2000
                  
               
               The scene of On the Road’s composition is perhaps the
                  most mythologized of any postwar American book. Significantly, Morris chooses to
                  retype (or reprint) the 2008 text of the (so-called) Original
                     Scroll
                  . In effect, then, Morris is returning On the Road from codex form to scroll form. He does not,
                  however, adopt the formatting or the cover design of the Original Scroll edition (Figure 6),
                  instead opting for the design of the 2007 Penguin UK edition (Figure 7), the text of which is based on the 1957
                  Viking edition (Figure 8). On
                     the Road has been printed in hundreds — if not thousands — of editions
                  worldwide since its first appearance. It may be one of the world’s most frequently
                  shoplifted books; it may also be among the most frequently bootlegged in
                  unauthorized foreign editions. One website alone features over 300 On the Road covers (see below) from around the
                     world.See . Many of those covers
                  emphasize an aspect of the novel — the road, alcohol, alluring women, Americana,
                  male friendship, etc. The various designs of On the
                     Road, in other words, are a goldmine of data about the book’s reception
                  and dissemination. Kerouac himself even designed a cover (Figure 14), which features a solitary figure and a description of the
                  book as a modern prose novel.
               
               
                  First US Edition, Viking 1957
                  
               
               
                  Library of America, 2007
                  
               
               
                  First UK edition (Deutsch), 1958
                  
               
               
                  China, 1998
                  
               
               
                  Ukraine, 1995
                  
               
               
                  Turkey, 1993
                  
               
               
                  Kerouac's own cover design, 1952
                  
               
               
                  iPad, Amplified Edition, 2011
                  
               
               Morris’ choice of cover designs could hardly have been accidental. But what does
                  he mean by the book’s title? It could be interpreted as an ironic critique of what
                  Daniel Belgrad calls the mid-century culture of
                     spontaneity
                  ; it could also be taken as suggesting that the
                  process of recopying is a more active form of reading, allowing greater insight
                  into the mindset of an author. But given the hypermediated nature of the On the Road text(s), as well as of Kerouac’s persona, how
                  can an act of remediation get Morris (or Morris’ readers) into Kerouac’s head?
                  Importantly, Getting Inside Kerouac’s Head involves
                  at least two remediations — from printed book to blog, and from blog to détourned
                  book. The book reprints (nearly) the exact pages of the Original Scroll book, only in reverse order. Thus it is possible to
                  read the entire text of the On the Road scroll
                  (book), word for word, simply by turning the book’s pages to the right rather than
                  to the left. Although the book and the blog may contain exactly the same (or
                  nearly the same) words, they are very different works. Morris, it should be noted,
                  reproduces the lineation and exact formatting of the original scroll book —
                  although occasionally slight variations in lineation can be noted. He also
                  reproduces Kerouac’s errors exactly, as for instance jaloppy on the first
                  page .
               After considerable, but not exhaustive, examination, I have found only a few minor
                  errata in Morris’ transcription, but those errata demonstrate
                  that retyping the book was a labor of love, rather than simply a scanned version
                  of the original (which to the casual observer would appear identical). The most
                  conspicuous erratum is in the book’s first sentence. Howard Cunnell, the editor of
                  the Original Scroll, has preserved a double met in
                  the famous first sentence of the book: I first met met Neal
                     not long after my father died. . .
                  . Morris does not preserve the double met.
                  According to Cunnell, the double met was preserved because it
                     so beautifully suggests the sound of a car misfiring before starting up a long
                     journey
                  . Whether or not this is the case, it is
                  unlikely that Kerouac would have preserved such an error. Morris may have
                  inadvertently corrected the redundancy. Aside from several other errata (a
                  reversed quotation mark on page 291, which can also be found in the blog’s
                  November 29, 2008 entry; a missing sentence on page 269; some missing text on page
                  275), Morris (and Thurston as editor) appear to have carried out an
                  extraordinarily careful transcription — contrary to what one might expect from a
                  blog as a casual form of instantaneous publication.
               The original GIJKH blog features a two-paragraph
                  project proposal, appropriated entirely from a pre-existing blog posting by
                  Kenneth Goldsmith. The book features an expanded introduction by Goldsmith. The
                  introduction is worth quoting at length, since it bears on the book’s genesis, as
                  well as its meaning: A few years ago I was lecturing to a
                     class at Princeton. After the class, a small group of students came up to me to
                     tell me about a workshop that they were taking with one of the most well-known
                     fiction writers in America. They were complaining about her lack of
                     imagination. For example, she had them pick their favorite writer and come in
                     next week with an original work in the style of that author. I asked one
                     of the students which author they chose. She answered Jack Kerouac. She then
                     added that the assignment felt meaningless to her because the night before she
                     tried to get into Kerouac’s head and scribbled a piece in his
                        style to fulfill the assignment. It occurred to me that for this student
                     to actually write in the style of Kerouac, she would have been better off
                     taking a road trip across the country in a ‘48 Buick with the convertible roof
                     down, gulping Benzedrine by the fistful, washing ‘em down with bourbon, all the
                     while typing furiously away on a manual typewriter, going 85 miles per hour
                     down a ribbon of desert highway. And even then, it would’ve been a completely
                     different experience, not to mention a very different piece of writing, than
                     Kerouac’s. 
                     
                  
               
               Morris’ appropriation of this paragraph provides an ingenious unoriginal
                  point of origin for his project. As a repudiation of creative writing pedagogy,
                  Goldsmith’s provocation is rather standard fare. More interestingly, Goldsmith is
                  proposing a radically mimetic way of producing (or reproducing) a literary text —
                  requiring not merely the rewriting and rereading of the text, but the attempted
                  reconstruction (or imitation) of the author’s total writing experience. Setting
                  aside for a moment the playfulness (and impossibility) of Goldsmith’s Borgesian
                  pedagogical strategy, he makes an important point about how very different the student’s piece of writing would be from Kerouac’s.
                  Although Goldsmith trots out familiar clichés of On the
                     Road’s composition, as anyone who has read the Original Scroll edition knows, many of those clichés are false.
                  Kerouac claimed not to have used Benzedrine while working on the scroll. Kerouac
                  made no secret of his dissatisfaction with the 1957 version of On the Road, but he did not claim the scroll was the text
                  to be preferred. He worked on editing the book for six years after producing the
                  scroll, and there are two extent subsequent typescripts by his hand that
                  incorporate substantial changes. Not only are there divergences between the scroll
                  and the 1957 text, there are also letters and journals Kerouac used in composing
                  the book. In effect, to choose a text of On the Road
                  is a matter of choosing at what point in time one wants to get inside of Kerouac’s
                  head. One commentator  has even suggested that On the Road should be considered primarily an oral text,
                  a form of typetalking. Goldsmith’s snapshot account elides much of this
                  process — his syntax suggests that Kerouac was typing while driving (and
                  drinking!). Goldsmith emphasizes the bohemian dimension of the book, rather than
                  the three weeks in which Kerouac composed the scroll in his mother’s apartment, or
                  the complex collective editorial process that led to the 1957 text.
               One effect of the scroll text is that it de-novelizes On the
                     Road.For a concise overview of the importance of the original
                     scroll text, see . Sante argues that the scroll is the living version [of On
                           the Road] for our time.
                   By using real names, the book becomes a more direct record of Kerouac’s
                  experiences. The scroll text is more homoerotic and more misogynistic; it is, in
                  the words of its editor, Howard Cunnell, a markedly darker,
                     edgier, and uninhibited text than the published text
                  . Perhaps the scroll text does allow readers
                  to get further into Kerouac’s head, but the many layers of mediation and irony in
                  the presentation of Morris’ project would seem to suggest the difficulty of
                  undertaking such a telepathic procedure by textual means. Consider for instance
                  this exchange (Figure 16) between Morris and a fan
                  of his blog, Jannie Sue Funster (a real person so far as I can
                  ascertain):
               
                  
               
               There is a healthy dose of English sarcasm in Morris’ grin, but there is also
                  politeness and empathy. Jannie Sue’s identification with the project is seemingly
                  at odds with the heroic masculinity typically associated with the book. In fact,
                  Kerouac misspelled LuAnne Henderson’s (Neal Cassady’s first wife’s) name
                  throughout the scroll (in the 1957 Viking edition she is known as Mary Lou).
                  Jannie’s identification is predicated on a mistaken homology, and yet her tragic
                  reading of the novel is to my mind oddly more accurate than the conventional pop
                  cultural reading of the novel as a celebration of bohemian escapism. Why shouldn’t
                  Morris share Jannie Sue and Kerouac’s sense that everybody’s got this broken
                     feeling? Perhaps that is just as authentic a response to the book.
               Is Morris being sincere when he suggests that chewing on
                     Kerouac’s words is the most thrilling read/ride of my life? Retyping
                  one page per day of someone else’s novel into a blog would hardly seem thrilling —
                  in a sense it is the inverse of Goldsmith’s notion of vicariously retracing
                  Kerouac’s journey. Morris seemingly goes nowhere beyond his keyboard. He makes no
                  direct comment on the textual and cultural morass that is On
                     the Road — rather he unimagines (and perhaps even re-personalizes) what
                  by now can only be read as a collective text, a product of millions of readings.
                  The blog — the most democratic and derided of publishing formats, as well as
                  perhaps the easiest means by which to violate copyright online — is a fitting
                  venue. Kerouac’s legendary typing skills are returned to the bureaucratic regimens
                  from which they emerged. To add another ironic dimension to Morris’ project, the
                  Kerouac estate has for decades been extremely protective of Kerouac’s letters and
                  unpublished manuscripts. Morris has thus republished a document that for over
                  fifty years was unavailable to readers. On the Road
                  provides ample proof of Jerome McGann’s claim that Every
                     document, every moment in every document conceals (or reveals) an indeterminate
                     set of interfaces that open into alternate spaces and temporal
                     relations
                  . Whereas On the
                     Road’s marketing has largely sold readers on the prospect of getting
                  inside Kerouac’s head, Morris’ project rejects an unmediated entry into the
                  psyche. Though Kerouac’s writing process was often frenzied and sporadic, On the Road took nearly ten years of sustained effort to
                  reach print. Morris’ rewriting, by contrast, takes the form of a daily ritual
                  practice. Every post indicates the date and time of its posting. For some twenty
                  minutes each day, Morris could be said to conduct a devotional exercise within the
                  highly regimented chronological format of the blog.
               Morris’ book Re-Writing Freud (Figure 17) adapts and repurposes another iconic text,
                  Freud’s Interpretation of Dreams
                  ; he has recently released a further remediation of
                  that project, an iPad app (Figure 18) which
                  scrambles, resizes, and overlays words drawn from Freud’s translated text —
                  culminating in a mystic writing pad.
               
               
                  
                     Re-Writing Freud, 2005
                  
               
               
                  
                     Re-Writing Freud, 2011
                  
               
               The app points suggestively toward emergent metadata schemes and delivery formats.
                  It is now possible, for instance, to obtain the On the
                     Road as an iPad app called an Amplified
                     Edition, in the iBooks (epub) format, in a Kindle edition, as well as
                  to download bootlegged pdf versions. Channeling Morris, Goldsmith raises the
                  obvious question in his introduction: If Kerouac were alive
                     today, would he be publishing on paper, or blogging, or tweeting his way across
                     America?
                  . Asking this question is a little bit like
                  asking if On the Road could have existed if Kerouac
                  (like many men of his generation) had never learned to type. On the Road is in many respects the sum of its textual and mythical
                  histories, rather than the singular production of a doomed genius. This makes it
                  more difficult to read On the Road as a spontaneously
                  produced confessional narrative, but it makes the book no less interesting as an
                  iconic catalog of postwar American media culture and its global influence.
               The sordid history of the Kerouac estate presents a fascinating case study in the
                  hypocrisies of current copyright law — although none of this specific history is
                  revealed in Getting Inside Jack Kerouac’s Head. When
                  Kerouac died in 1969, the bank valued the estate at a nominal
                     $1
                  . On October 28, 2009 (on a day when Morris was typing
                  out his 400 words), a Florida judge declared Kerouac’s mother’s 1973 will a fake.
                     Thus, Kerouac’s entire estate (now estimated at
                  $30 million)  can be considered to have been misappropriated from 1973
                     onward. If Morris’ project pushes at the boundaries of fair use (or fair
                  dealing in the UK), it would be a rich irony to accuse him of copyright violation.
                  Exactly fifty years after its composition, the scroll sold for $2.4 million,
                  setting the world auction record for a literary manuscript . The scroll’s consignor was Tony Sampas, the nephew of
                  Kerouac’s third wife, Stella Sampas, the presumed forger of the will. The winning
                  bidder was James Orsay, owner of the Indianapolis Colts, who although he owns the
                  physical manuscript, is not listed as a copyright holder of the book version of
                  the scroll. As a result of the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act of 2008,
                  the 1957 text of On the Road will remain under
                  copyright in the United States until the year 2052 (95 years from the date of its
                  first publication). The Original Scroll edition will
                  be copyright until 2102. Nonetheless, it remains uncertain who in fact owns the
                  copyright: control over the estate continues to be under litigation.
            
         

            From the Prison House of Language to the Prison House (or Probation) of
               Metadata
            The readings of Lin, Dworkin, Philip and Morris that I have suggested here could be
               extended to encompass a broader range of recent writing; I would mention in
               particular the writing of Robert Fitterman, Monica de la Torre, Kenneth Goldsmith,
               Vanessa Place, Kim Rosenfield, Caroline Bergvall, Nicholas Thurston, Matthew Timmons,
               Derek Beaulieu and Ara Shirinyan — although this list (or meta-list) is far from
               complete. Recent avant-garde writing from the US, UK, and Canada has a near obsession
               with classification. The Listmania found in this writing challenges a passive
               acquiescence to the cataloguing procedures we experience every day. Perhaps
               avant-garde poetry has transferred itself from the prison house of language of the
               70s and 80s to the prison house of classification in the Internet era. In saying
               this, I recognize that I am awkwardly assigning agency to a number of overlapping
               historical categories. The writers under discussion in this paper are careful not to
               assume simplistic correlations between metadata schemes and ideology (or politics).
               Though these works suggest that we are captives of classification, they do not
               necessarily claim that we are deterministically imprisoned by our classifications. To
               adapt the prison house metaphor, perhaps the door of the Bastille has been open for a
               while. Contrary to enduring myth, only seven prisoners were freed in the storming of
               the Bastille. This makes it no less important as an event, or rather no less
               important as a shifting series of events, images, descriptions and
               (re)categorizations.
            In the words of Perec, Taxonomy can make your head spin
               .
         

            Acknowledgments
            An early version of this paper was presented as part of the The
                  Poetics of Metadata panel at the 2011 Society for Textual Studies
               Conference. I would like to thank my co-panelists Paul Benzon and Mark Sample. Andrea
               Andersson offered helpful commentary on a draft of this essay.
         
