Title:  Explicit!: Coding Carceral Censorship and Social
                    Biases in United States Prisons
Volume:  019
Issue:  3
Date:  September 26, 2025
Abstract:  
                Social practice artist Sue Jeong Ka’s ongoing digital database, Coding Carceral Censorship (CCC) (2019-), charts the
                    United States carceral system’s publication censorship. Ka made data categories
                    to track the knowledge production that US prison book bans target and why.
                    Concentrating on the most common justification for this censorship, sexual
                    explicitness, her initial data analysis reveals restrictive penal trends that
                    devalue women’s and East Asian sexual speech via romance/erotica literature and
                    manga bans, respectively. These patterns reflect how national white
                    cis-hetero-patriarchal values play an outsized role in determining which types
                    of expression the government protects and prioritizes. Our article argues that
                    through its capacity to identify such under-examined censorship patterns, CCC
                    underscores Digital Humanities’ (DH’s) potential to intervene in and interpret
                    the prison industrial complex’s social biases. CCC’s data indicate that US
                    prison bans enact these biases through excessively barring content by and about
                    marginalized groups, thereby impeding incarcerated people’s access to socially
                    marginalized perspectives and authors. In framing CCC as both critically made DH
                    and part of Ka’s socially engaged art, we further suggest that her database
                    illuminates how DH and socially engaged art practices can be mutually
                    enriching.
            
Full Body Text: 


                
                "The alphabet is an abolitionist. If you would keep a people
                        enslaved, refuse to teach them to read… The despotic spirit which
                        instinctively disliked free schools also sought to exclude books and
                        newspapers except for aristocracy… It struck at the tongue. It abhorred free
                        speech. It knew that knowledge is power, and it trembled." 
                    
                
                What is the relationship between the right to read and abolition? In the
                    aftermath of the United States Civil War, abolitionists argued that institutions
                    continued to disenfranchise formerly enslaved people by limiting their access to
                    reading and education. Correspondingly, throughout US history, censors have used
                    book bans to cut off marginalized groups (e.g., women, people of color, and
                    queer and poor people) from the potential power of knowledge. To be clear,
                    sources of knowledge, such as reading, are not by themselves automatically
                    liberatory. On the one hand, both reading as a way of knowing and particular
                    content read can reinforce ideologies that undermine marginalized peoples’
                    points of view. For instance, critical pedagogy writers Paulo Freire,
                        Donaldo Mercado, and Henry A. Giroux lament the ways in which formal
                        colonial education uses literacy not as tool of liberation or democracy, but
                        instead as one for training students to reproduce
                            efficiently and unquestioningly the dominant ideology
                        .  On the other hand, by
                    reading against the grain, marginalized readers can use even dominant cultural
                    texts to serve their own interests . In short,
                    although reading does not guarantee empowerment, inhibiting it among any
                    population hinders that population’s access to learning, debate, and alternative
                    perspectives. Therefore, prohibiting select groups’ reading is a mechanism for
                    minimizing their paths to power. The legacy of restricting marginalized people’s
                    right to read thrives in prisons, where publication censorship practices in the
                    nation are most extreme and opaque . In this sense,
                    the shackles of epistemic unfreedom connect historical abolitionist objections
                    to slavery and contemporary abolitionist objections to the prison industrial
                    complex. 
                Book banning in the US carceral system is full of inconsistencies but, overall,
                    it consistently favors those with the most power in society while disadvantaging
                    those with the least. This system prohibits publications that its
                    decision-makers deem a threat to orderly conduct 
                    . Federal Bureau of Prisons regulations allow for
                        the censorship of books found to be detrimental to the
                            security, good order, rehabilitation or discipline of the
                            institution.
                        . Yet criteria for
                    these bans are anything but straightforward. From individual states and prison
                    facilities to prison officials and mailroom staff, there are multiple levels of
                    decision-making that can determine whether a single publication’s content is
                    permissible. At each level, the judgment calls are prone to haphazard logic.
                    Banned prison book lists vary state by state and censorship guidelines vary from
                    one correctional facility to the next within the same region. Moreover, the
                    appeals process is arduous for incarcerated people to navigate while the courts
                    defer to prison administrators. As a result, prison personnel can usually deny
                    books in hasty and unreasonable ways without challenge . This faulty censorship system entails little recourse for incarcerated
                    readers while limiting their resources for knowledge and self-knowledge.
                    Marginalized groups disproportionately comprise the US prison population with
                    the high incarceration rates of people of color, queer people, and poor people’s
                    being well documented. The Sentencing Project, a research and advocacy
                        center with in-depth and relatively up-to-date data analysis on the US
                        prison population, articulates these social disparities through statistics.
                        For instance, a recent Sentencing Project study found Black men are six times as likely to be incarcerated as white men and
                            Latinx men are 2.5 times as likely
                         while another reported that LGBTQ+ adults are incarcerated at three times the rate of
                            the total adult population
                        . Such studies often discuss how
                        impoverished conditions predispose people to incarceration. Indeed, the
                        Council of State Governments Justice Center’s work makes clear that a
                        significant majority of incarcerated Americans are financially
                        under-resourced: two-thirds of people detained in jail
                            report annual incomes under $12,000 prior to arrest
                        . Marginalized groups in prison are also
                    hard hit by publication banning biases that hinder their access to
                    self-understanding. In recent years, PEN America and Thurgood Marshall Civil
                    Rights Center have cataloged numerous instances of US prisons targeting material
                    that addresses racial justice, LGBTQAI+ perspectives, and civil and human
                    rights, including content related to the prison industrial complex 
                    . 
                The digital database, Coding Carceral Censorship
                    (CCC), charts such censorship trends. Since 2019, social practice artist Sue
                    Jeong Ka has been creating this repository of state-wide prison publication bans
                    to visualize and analyze the data. As a work in progress, CCC’s web interface
                    now freely provides visitors structured and synthesized data about prohibited
                    prison publications. Its database records this hard-to-find information with a
                    broader array of publication types and more detail about each publication than
                    any other database that we can locate. Kate Cauley stressed the unmet need
                        for a digital repository with structured data on banned prison books
                        throughout the United States . More recently,
                        the non-profit news organization, The Marshall Project, launched a
                        searchable database on US banned prison books by state. Although useful,
                        this database has far fewer data categories than CCC and does not code
                        authors’ gender or race while it mostly neglects publications that are not
                        books, such as comics, magazines, and journals .  Through its breadth and
                    depth, CCC grapples with US prison censorship patterns that reflect national
                    white cis-hetero-patriarchal hierarchies by reframing data from government
                        records. White cis-hetero-patriarchy refers to a system of dominance
                        that simultaneously privileges racial whiteness, cis identity (wherein one
                        self-identifies with the sex one was assigned at birth) heterosexuality
                        (i.e., straight sexuality), and patriarchy (systemic sexism). The hyphenated
                        term emphasizes how these types of dominance intersect with and reinforce
                        one another . White
                        cis-hetero-patriarchal forces are forces that advantage white, cisgender,
                        heterosexual men and/or that advantage white, cisgender, heterosexual, and
                        patriarchal perspectives. Ka’s project demonstrates how databases can
                    make social biases explicit. 
                This article argues that, in so doing, CCC underscores Digital Humanities’
                    potential to intervene in and interpret the prison industrial complex’s white
                    cis-hetero-patriarchal biases. CCC’s preliminary data indicate that US prison
                    bans enact these biases through disproportionately barring content by and about
                    marginalized groups, thereby impeding incarcerated people’s access to
                    marginalized social perspectives. In other words, prisons’ excessive regulation
                    of publications with content centering marginalized groups and by authors from
                    these groups hampers incarcerated readers’ opportunities to engage with views
                    and voices beyond white cis-hetero-patriarchy. Ka’s data categories make such
                    discriminatory censorship policies and practices legible. As later discussed in
                    more depth, these data categories include the censored publications’ titles
                    (from Department of Corrections (DOC) documentation), types, genres, and
                    subgenres (based on American Library Association’s Cataloging and Classification
                    guidelines) . The categories also cover the social
                    identities of censored publications’ authors (based on the CCC team’s own
                    research into their gender, racial, and ethnic identities), and publication
                    censorship by state and individual correctional facilities as well as the cited
                    reasons for publications’ censored status (based on state legal codes and DOC
                    documentation). CCC’s interactive web displays expressively picture many of
                    these results by visualizing them on different scales and through design
                    elements that connote governmental and carceral data gathering. 
                CCC suggests a role for socially engaged art in what the #transformDH collective
                    calls a necessary shift in focus of digital humanities from
                        technical processes to political ones, via work that center[s] on the intersection of digital production and social
                        transformation through research, pedagogy, and activism
                    . Socially engaged art (also known as
                    social practice art or art as social practice) refers to process-driven and
                    participatory work that uses the tools of art (sometimes in obvious ways and
                    sometimes in more invisible theoretical or methodological ones) to bring about
                    social change  Definitions vary, but
                    they often attribute collaboration, dialogue, and critical, contextual
                    understanding to this artistic mode 
                    . For instance, Minerva Cuevas’ socially
                        engaged artwork Mejor Vida Corp.  (in English
                            Better Life Corporation) (1998–) stems from
                        her earlier public interventions in Mexico City. It is a web-based nonprofit
                        corporation that provides a variety of public goods and services. Through
                        this interface, Cuevas has shared pre-validated subway
                            tickets, pre-paid envelopes for domestic and international mailing,
                            student ID cards that allow users to receive discounted rates, and
                            barcode stickers that reduce the price of food in supermarkets.
                        Mejor Vida Corp. parodies codes of the
                        capitalist market to critique its exploitative tactics while offering a
                        small-scale, free alternative as well as grassroots inspiration to
                        participants who act as the work’s donors, recipients, and/or observers . Accordingly, Ka’s web project operates
                    to precipitate social change by educating its users, in her case, about prison
                    censorship and about the marginalized content producers and consumers it
                    affects. CCC serves as a vehicle for Ka’s wide-ranging work on banned prison
                    publications, extending to art installations and exhibitions, a collective zine
                    series, scholarship (such as this essay), as well as behind-the-scenes and
                    public-facing exchanges with knowledge workers, activists, and artists. Ka
                        began investigating prison censorship for the installation, Book Repair Lab: The Jefferson Market Library and the
                            Women's House of Detention (2019-ongoing). Through it, she set
                        up a workstation in The New School’s Kellen Gallery for fixing damaged New
                        York Public Library (NYPL) books on the wish lists of Rikers Correctional
                        Center’s incarcerated residents before redirecting the books to NYPL’s Rose
                        M. Singer Center jail library there. Book Repair
                            Lab also traced relationships between the New School, NYPL, and
                        NYC correctional services. This work inspired Ka to continue amassing,
                        aggregating, and analyzing banned publication lists. As shown on her artist
                        website, these activities inform many of Ka’s projects since 2019 . Ka’s framing of her database clarifies ways
                    that Digital Humanities (DH) and socially engaged art can enhance one another.
                    As a DH project, CCC presents research findings stemming from her socially
                    engaged art in a data-based and accessible manner while, as a socially engaged
                    artist, Ka’s creative handling of her database makes its social justice concerns
                    enticing to explore.
                
                    Sue Jeong Ka, Book Repair Lab: The Jefferson Market
                            Library and the Women's House of Detention, 2019, site-specific
                        installation with book cart, table, second-hand books, and artist’s book,
                        The New School’s Anna-Maria and Stephen Kellen Gallery, New York, New York.
                        (Photo credit: Eat the Cake NYC)
                    In a gallery room, the artist sits at a desk while repairing a used
                        book from the book cart that stands beside her. 
                    
                
                Direct experiences activating CCC and related undertakings shape our appraisal of
                    it. Ka’s project exemplifies critical making because it departs from the model
                    of an isolated work devised mainly for technical or aesthetic appreciation . Far from self-enclosed, her database is a dynamic
                    platform for artistic production, exchange, study, and activism. To borrow
                    Critical Making Lab Director Matt Ratto’s phrase, through Ka, CCC conducts
                        ongoing critical analysis of its own
                    constitutive parts and networks .
                Relevant literature underscores DH’s role in enhancing incarcerated people’s
                    access to self-expressive, educational, and entertainment resources. DH
                        projects that engage the prison industrial complex must, however, be
                        vigilant to avoid exposing sensitive personal information of the parties
                        involved and exacerbating incarcerated people’s exploitation. Many
                        technology reporters and librarians recognize this complex’s stakeholders’
                        penchant for weaponizing data and digital tools in such predatory ways 
                        
                        
                        . Like CCC, many DH projects about the
                    prison industrial complex harness alluring digital interfaces to raise public
                    awareness about the systems and systematic barriers that diminish incarcerated
                    people’s humanity . For example, the web-based
                    American Prison Writing Archive (APWA) is the US’s largest collection of
                    non-fiction essays by currently incarcerated Americans about their experiences
                    behind bars. The platform grants incarcerated people authorial and editorial
                    power . A handful of other digital archives, DH
                    mapping projects, and online pedagogical networks also foreground interactive
                    and data-based storytelling to critique the penal system. Along with APWA, some
                    notable archives include: JSTOR’s American Prison
                        Newspapers: Voices from Inside the Prison; After Violence Archive; The Washington State
                        Prison History Project; and Inside Books
                        Project Archive. Antoni Muntadas’s The
                            File Room (1994) does not focus on the carceral context, but as
                        an artistically staged database of censorship cases, the work is a relevant
                        digital archive precedent to CCC. First installed at the Chicago Cultural
                        Center, The File Room consisted of a
                        file-cabinet-filled room at the center of which was a computer terminal with
                        an online, open-source database. Through it, users could browse hundreds of
                        accounts of censorship and upload their own .
                            The File Room now remains and continues to
                        grow as a website. In addition to building on existing projects’ work
                    with state departments’ records to generate CCC’s database, CCC’s Geographical
                    Information System presentation of correctional facilities (explained later)
                    bears similarity with DH projects, such as  and ,
                    which center carceral geographies to expose their infrastructures. Other DH
                    projects emphasize education, such as Duke University’s Carceral Studies Network
                    website of curricular resources. Together, critical prison industrial complex DH
                    projects span different focal points and strategies but often serve at least one
                    common purpose: to inform the public about this complex’s hidden inner-workings
                    and unjust power dynamics. CCC shares this purpose, while distinguishing itself
                    by charting biases in US prison publication censorship patterns. 
                This article describes CCC’s capacity for exposing these under-examined patterns
                    and their underpinning biases. To this end, we concentrate on two findings from
                    the CCC dataset: many states’ prisons restrict romance/erotica and manga
                    publications by labeling them sexually explicit. In what follows, we first
                    introduce these case studies by explaining Ka’s critical making strategies for
                    building a database that renders the information about such bans visible. Our
                    discussion then performs the kind of critical inquiry CCC can facilitate about
                    neglected prison censorship dynamics and social biases therein. This application
                    points to the penal system’s discriminatory tendencies toward publications that
                    are not associated with white, Euro-American, and/or cis-hetero-patriarchal
                    cultural production. Our layered analysis of CCC resonates with its
                    multi-pronged challenge to US prisons’ discriminatory approaches through
                    socially engaged and critically made database design.
            

                1. CCC as Critical Making
                The CCC database evolved as part of Ka’s artistic reckoning with structural
                    barriers that drastically limit incarcerated people’s access to reading
                    material. Her ongoing examination of this topic shapeshifts in response to each
                    iteration’s analytical focal points, participants, and spaces (physical,
                    virtual, and/or discursive). CCC stems from Ka’s open-ended critical making
                    approach to prison censorship and carceral exchange. In particular, CCC’s
                    information architecture showcases her creative and critical methods for
                    adopting digital formats. It breaks with default web templates to aesthetically
                    convey her database’s conceptual and contextual specificities. As we will
                    detail, CCC presents data in evocative yet orderly geometric compositions,
                    including a matrix presentation that nods to the history of computing via the
                    punch card matrix. 
                
                    1.1. CCC’s Information Architecture 
                    CCC aims to raise awareness about US carceral information exchange and
                        censorship. This project leans into a data-driven format more than Ka’s
                        previous ones on the same topic, while still maintaining the expressive
                        concerns of her social art practice. She conceived CCC not only as a
                        methodical user-friendly representation of copious data about US prisons’
                        banned publications, but also as a critical entry point into this topic. 
                    CCC’s visuals refer to governmental and computational systems of
                        meaning-making. The database uses arrangements of rectangles where each
                        rectangle serves as a data point and signifies a single banned prison
                        publication. Together, the rectangles map US prison bans according to
                        different geographic scopes. For example, Ka’s national display pictures
                        individual publications together through a matrix of rectangles. 

                    
                        View of publications banned in prisons throughout the US. Combines Ka’s data on all the states’ prison
                            banned publications spanning 2010 to 2024. Of the 50 states in the
                                US only 26 have prison banned publication lists (i.e., relatively
                                consistent documentation of banned publications in prisons
                                throughout the state). Consequently, CCC data represents only these
                                states. These include Arizona, California, Colorado, Connecticut,
                                Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota,
                                Mississippi, Missouri, New Hampshire, New Jersey, North Carolina,
                                Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah,
                                Virginia, Washington, Wisconsin, and Wyoming. Sue Jeong Ka, Level 1: The U.S. from
                                Banned Books: Coding Carceral Censorship, 2019-, website
                            screenshot. 
                        A webpage with a grayscale matrix of rectangles. A cursor hovers
                            over one rectangle that is accompanied by a black pop-up box with
                            publication information indicating that this rectangle represents the
                            prison banned magazine Aerospace & Defense
                                Technology.
                        
                    
                    As we will discuss further, Ka uses state legal codes and DOC banned book
                        lists to generate data about which publications prisons in different states
                        censor and why. 
                    
                        View of publications banned in prisons by state.
                             Sue Jeong Ka, Level 2: Individual States
                             from Coding Carceral Censorship,
                            2019-, website screenshot. 
                        A webpage showing rectangles that represent Arizona and Colorado
                            prison censored publications organized in columns by state and in rows
                            by the publication’s first letter. 
                        
                    
                    
                        
                            View of correctional facilities. Sue
                                Jeong Ka, Level 3: Facilities 
                                    from Coding Carceral Censorship,
                                2019-, website screenshot. 
                            A webpage with a grayscale aerial map showing two Kansas
                                facilities and the number of publications they each ban: Topeka
                                Correctional Facility (23) and Lansing Correctional Facility
                                (82).
                            
                        
                    
                    The database employs a rectangular visualization system to represent banned
                        publications. Clicking on a rectangle reveals a black pop-up box containing
                        the publication’s title, and, if available, author/s, and year. The national
                        view differentiates rectangles by width to signify three primary reasons for
                        banning based on DOC documentation: 
                    
                        View of publications banned in prisons throughout the US with a legend
                            explaining how to read the matrix’s rectangles. Sue Jeong Ka, Level 1: The U.S. from
                                Coding Carceral Censorship, 2019-, website screenshot. 
                        A webpage with a grayscale matrix of rectangles along with a legend
                            of rectangles with three different widths, each of which indicates one
                            of the primary justifications for prison publication censorship: no
                            reason given, mail censorship, and sexually explicit. 
                        
                    

                    At the state level, users can apply filters to explore DOC’s additional
                        content-based censorship reasons.
                    
                        View of publications banned in prisons by state and censorship reason
                            drop-down menu. Sue Jeong Ka, Level 2: Individual States from Coding Carceral Censorship, 2019-, website
                            screenshot. 
                        The same image as Figure 3, a webpage showing rectangles that
                            represent Arizona and Colorado prison censored publications organized in
                            columns by state and alphabetically, along with a drop-down menu of
                            three different censorship reason types for filtering the view of banned
                            publications. 
                        
                    
                    CCC’s entirely grayscale color palette suggests the governmental paperwork
                        behind its own data collection. Moreover, the database’s matrix composition
                        draws inspiration from the rectangular matrix of punch cards used for
                        proto-computing data processing. Ka thought of Herman Hollerith’s punch
                        card, devised for the eleventh US census of 1890. One such machine-readable
                        punch card represented one US resident’s data. Each hole punch mark within
                        the columns and rows on the card stood for a data point relating to that
                        resident’s characteristics, such as their sex, race, employment, marital
                        status, etc. . 
                    
                        Hollerith punch card from the 1890 US Census of Population. Wikimedia.
                            Creative Commons.
                        A paper punch card with columns divided into data fields and some
                            punched data points.
                        
                    
                    The 1890 census was the first to rely on mechanical punch cards. In the years
                        leading up to this census, an upsurge in immigration and anxieties about
                        racial mixing following the emancipation of Americans of African descent
                        motivated the US government to adopt a more systematic process for gathering
                        data on its changing population . The
                        characteristic represented by each punch mark helped normalize reductive
                        concepts of identity. Moreover, as Martha Hodes writes, this card design
                        gave the government data to further exclude those identified with
                        marginalized characteristics from participation in the
                            full privileges of national citizenship
                        
                        .
                    By alluding to Hollerith’s punch card data matrix, CCC recalls techniques of
                        governmental control, discrimination, and disenfranchisement embedded within
                        computation’s legacy — including its prehistory. After inventing his punch
                        card-based tabulation machine for the census, Hollerith founded Tabulating
                        Machine Company, which in 1924 became International Business Machines (IBM)
                            . This corporation continues to have an
                        immense impact on computing technologies today.
                
                
                    1.2. Navigating Social Identity Categories with CCC
                    Ka’s integration of visual traces from this punch-card-to-IBM trajectory
                        evokes computational methods’ socio-political ramifications. In keeping with
                        these methods, her datasets also rely on social identity categories of race
                        and ethnicity as well as gender. She uses these categories to shed light on
                        racist and sexist censorship practices corresponding to authors’ identities.
                        Nevertheless, like the social categories of the 1890 census, Ka’s are based
                        on hegemonic constructs and do not represent the vast range of ways people
                        self-identify their race, ethnicity, and gender. A lack of preexisting
                        structured data on publication authors' self-identification in relation to
                        these attributes is one of the many challenges Ka negotiates when creating
                        her database. Here, as Catherine D'Ignazio and Lauren F. Klein’s remark
                            [t]he absence of data, in this case, on
                        authors’ social identities, becomes an important
                            takeaway, as meaningful as the data themselves
                        . In the face of this absence, CCC’s
                        team collects their own data on authors’ race, ethnicity, and gender via
                        online research. The team codes each author in the database according to the
                        latest 2020 US census categories of these properties of social identity.
                        This coding method draws on pronouns, names, and other indicators or
                        representations of authors that appear in the authors’ publications and
                        basic online searches. By using such signifiers, the CCC team loosely
                        approximates how prison officials, who are non-expert evaluators of the
                        publications that they decide to censor or not, perceive authors’ race,
                        ethnicity, and gender. Ka’s method for approximating prison officials’
                        impressions about these properties of identity follows sociological resume
                        studies as well as theories of the perception of both gender and racial
                        categorization 
                        . 
                    CCC directly applies the 2020 US census categories of race and ethnicity to
                        its author data but takes more liberties with this census’s binary “sex”
                        categories of male and female. Ka revises them as “gender” categories of men
                        (which includes transmen), women (which includes transwomen), uncertain (for
                        authors whose gender the CCC team cannot determine), non-binary, and
                        publisher (when authorship is not attributed to people but instead the
                        publisher). Whereas sex refers to how people identify biologically, Ka’s
                        shift to gender departs from reductive biologically determined definitions
                        of identity in favor of more inclusive and complex understandings of it.
                        Gender refers to culturally constructed notions of femininity and
                        masculinity that reflect an interplay between a person’s self-presentation
                        and others’ perception of it . With the
                        non-binary category, CCC makes space for studying the prison censorship of
                        authors who present as outside the gender binary of man or woman. CCC’s
                        categories still, however, simplify the nuances of gender. The database
                        fails to capture how an author’s gender might change, how people live gender
                        on a spectrum (rather than on static terms), and the great diversity of
                        identifications for gender beyond the binary. Even so, CCC’s five less than
                        ideal gender categories along with its US census racial and ethnicity
                        categories (that likewise overgeneralize group identities) allow the
                        database to highlight gendered and racialized disparities in prison
                        censorship publication practices.
                    Ka also developed a website mechanism for illustrating how race, ethnicity,
                        and gender intersect with censorship practices. To explore banned
                        publication authors by social identity, users can select categories of
                        gender as well as race and ethnicity. These categories each overlay texture
                        visualizations onto the existing data. Additionally, the database includes
                        categories that present DOC designated reasons for each publication’s
                        censorship with another kind of texture.
                    
                        Close-up view of part of Level 1, showing US prisons banned
                            publications filtered by the Black author category. Sue Jeong Ka, Level 1: The U.S. from
                                Coding Carceral Censorship, 2019-, website
                            screenshot.
                        A close-up view of a webpage with a grayscale matrix of rectangles,
                            representing individual US prison banned publications, some of which are
                            filled in with a crisscross pattern. Above this matrix, the race and
                            ethnicity menu’s selected Black category indicates that the rectangles
                            filled in with this crisscross pattern are publications by Black
                            authors.
                        
                    
                    
                        Close-up view of part of Level 1, showing US prison banned
                            publications filtered by the woman author category. Sue Jeong Ka, Level 1: The U.S. from
                                Coding Carceral Censorship, 2019-, website
                            screenshot.
                        A close-up view of a webpage with a grayscale matrix of rectangles,
                            representing individual US prison banned publications, some of which are
                            filled in with a striated weave pattern. Above this matrix, the gender
                            menu’s selected woman category indicates that the rectangles filled in
                            with this striated weave pattern are publications by women authors. 
                        
                    
                    Combining more than two types of categories (e.g., race & ethnicity,
                        gender, or censorship reasons) will generate a new composite texture. These
                        composite textures visually represent the intersectionality of censorship. 
                    
                        Close-up view of part of Level 1, showing US prison banned
                            publications filtered to show those banned for sexual explicitness by
                            Black women authors. Sue Jeong Ka, Level 1: The
                                U.S. from Coding Carceral
                                Censorship, 2019-, website screenshot.
                        A close-up view of a webpage with a grayscale matrix of rectangles,
                            representing individual US prison banned publications, some of which are
                            filled in with a horizontal textile-like pattern. Above this matrix, the
                            banned reasons’ selected sexually explicit category, the race and
                            ethnicity menu’s selected Black category and the gender menu’s selected
                            woman category together indicate that the rectangles filled in with this
                            horizontal textile-like pattern are publications banned for sexual
                            explicitness by Black women authors. 
                        
                    
                    Ka adopts and adapts governmental categories of identity to hold such social
                        disparities as well as their intersections up for scrutiny. Presently, CCC’s
                        “Design Statement” page articulates the project’s goal of proposing a new system for aggregating, structuring, and visualizing
                            carceral censorship data that empowers free and incarcerated people
                            along with banned publications’ authors to challenge prison
                            administration overreach, social discrimination, and civil rights
                            violations. This statement establishes CCC’s intent to provide
                        data in service of marginalized populations. It also marks CCC’s difference
                        from the 1890 census punch card, which served to codify the exclusion of
                        select US demographics. In contrast, by indexing censorship imposed on the
                        nation’s incarcerated readers, Ka’s project calls attention to an excluded
                        US demographic and the governmentally sanctioned biases that condition
                        incarcerated people’s access to knowledge. 
                    Ka’s bespoke conceptual website construction undermines the fallacy that DH
                        work either takes up theory or method, critical thinking or technical
                            making. Rather than relying on popular DH Content Management
                            Systems such as Omeka or WordPress, Ka turned to the web platform
                            Angular. Angular provides many kinds of visual languages for programmers
                            to choose from while its coding language of TypeScript allows for
                            intricate web design. Ka used the web interface application Figma to
                            wireframe CCC. CCC’s information architecture intertwines these
                        modes of production with references to the bureaucratic backdrop of its own
                        data and computing’s social legacy. Moreover, this database prompts critical
                        social examination of prison publication bans. CCC’s intersectional
                        visualization capacities not only mark how US carceral censorship affects
                        different identity groups of authors but also invite users to interrogate
                        the power dynamics and biases driving DOC censorship decisions. Ka’s own
                        preliminary CCC data analysis revealed that of all the censorship reasons,
                        DOC across the nation most frequently apply the sexually explicit
                        designation. She found this justification is largely applied to
                        romance/erotica literature (whose censorship mostly impacts women authors)
                        and manga (whose censorship mostly impacts East Asian authors). 
                
            

                2. Censoring romance/Erotica and Manga’s Sexual Speech in and beyond US
                    Prisons 
                According to our research, these under-examined censorship patterns indicate that
                    standards differentiating between acceptable and unacceptable sexual content are
                    rarely as neutral as they might first appear. Even when the guidelines for
                    banning sexually explicit or obscene content seem unbiased, US authorities’
                    application of them often devalues socially marginalized people and
                    perspectives. The heightened prison censorship of women’s and East Asians’
                    sexual speech via romance/erotica literature and manga we see in Ka’s initial
                    findings offer two telling examples. As previously noted, CCC data derive from a
                    synthesis of sources: DOC materials (such as their banned book lists, their
                    censorship codes, and publication censorship reports) that provide censorship
                    reasons, the CCC team’s research on authors’ identities, and the American
                    Library Association designations for different kinds of publications (such as
                    manga as a type of publication and romance and erotica as genres). CCC’s
                    database provides all the data for the categories and analyses discussed as well
                    as visualized in this article, but CCC’s website does not currently represent
                    all these categories and analyses. 
                A close look at CCC’s three most-detailed state datasets reflect broader US
                    prison ban trends. These trends align with those signaled by CCC’s aggregated
                    (if less up-to-date) national data from all states as well as other evidence
                    discussed later in this article, such as DOC censorship guidelines from various
                    states, case studies of specific prison publication bans, and content analysis
                    of such publications. The prison censorship data for the 26 states that
                        CCC represents are not yet all updated through 2024 nor are all the states’
                        datasets as clean as they could be. We feature waffle charts informed by the
                        most accurate data possible based on Ka’s up-to-date and cleaned state
                        datasets — those for California, Oregon, and Virginia. Ka prioritized
                        Oregon’s dataset because its DOC currently bans the most publications of any
                        state in the nation and provides the most detailed censorship documentation.
                        She finalized California’s and Virginia’s datasets in preparation for
                        CCC-related site-specific artwork commissioned for exhibitions in these
                        states.  In correctional facilities across Virginia (2,634 banned
                    publications), California (1,695 banned publications), and Oregon (5,936 banned
                    publications), the CCC shows significant DOC censorship of romance and erotica
                    for sexual explicitness, particularly regarding works in these genres authored
                    by women. In general, most romance and erotica authors are women, so it is not
                    surprising that the majority of these states’ prison-censored publications
                    associated with these genres are by women. According to a 2015
                        sociological study, 99 percent of romance authors are “female” . A more recent report by the
                        non-commercial, international and research data and analytics group
                        WordsRated found that 83 percent of romance and erotica books were written
                        by women . 
                
                
                    
                        Prominent censorship patterns related to banned romance/erotica
                            publications in Virginia, California, and Oregon DOC.
                        Waffle charts organized in three rows by state. Every state’s row
                            includes a waffle chart that visualizes each of the censorship
                            percentages described in the below table’s corresponding state
                            row.
                        
                    
                          
                    
                        
                            State DOC
                            Percentage of banned publications that are romance &
                                erotica
                            Percentage of banned publications in these genres authored by
                                women
                             Percentage of banned woman-authored romance & erotica
                                publications censored for sexual explicitness 
                        
                        
                            Virginia 
                            38%
                            71%
                            98%
                        
                        
                            California
                            11%
                            52%
                             California DOC does not provide censorship reasons 
                        
                        
                            Oregon
                            28%
                            65%
                             98% 
                        
                    
                Likewise, these three same states’ correctional facilities often target manga, a
                    publication type primarily by East Asian authors.
                
                    Prominent censorship patterns related to banned manga publications in
                        Virginia, California, and Oregon DOC.
                    Waffle charts organized in three rows by state. Every state’s row
                        includes a waffle chart that visualizes the percent of that state’s DOC
                        banned publications that are manga and the percent of those banned manga by
                        East Asian authors. These percentages correspond to those in the below
                        table.
                    
                

                
                    
                        State DOC
                        Percentage of banned publications that are manga
                        Percentage of banned manga publications in these genres authored by
                            East Asians
                         Percentage of banned East Asian-authored manga publications censored
                            for sexual explicitness 
                    
                    
                        Virginia
                        5%
                        100%
                        81%
                    
                    
                        California
                        12%
                        100%
                         California DOC does not provide censorship reasons 
                    
                    
                        Oregon
                        22%
                        98%
                         100% 
                    
                
                In short, California, Oregon, and Virginia prisons most often cite sexual
                    explicitness to justify their bans on romance/erotica and manga. These bans
                    result in DOC censorship of mostly women authors and East Asian authors
                    respectively.
                These prison censorship patterns are novel CCC-powered findings, but biased US
                    censorship practices in the US are nothing new. Hegemonic identity-group
                    concerns steered early US censorship policies of sexually explicit content. The
                    US Constitution’s First Amendment protects free speech and prohibits the
                    government from favoring any religions. Nevertheless, throughout the nation’s
                    history, many courts have suppressed sexually suggestive material to uphold
                    Christian morality. During the turn of the nineteenth century, Evangelicals of
                    the Second Great Awakening introduced bans of such material beyond the pale,
                    calling it obscenity. They attempted to use the state’s power to curb what they
                    perceived as sin . Christian anti-vice activist
                    Anthony Comstock’s crusade fortified earlier regulations with the 1873 Comstock
                    laws, ma[king] it a crime to knowingly mail obscene
                        materials or advertisements and information about obscene materials,
                        abortion, or contraception
                    . Comstock and other enforcers of such legislation
                    did not differentiate between content for sex education and sexual arousal . Courts’ objections to sexually explicit
                    material are now pitched in more secular terms, but obscenity rulings’ religious
                    heritage and related cis-hetero-patriarchal legacy still reinforce
                    discriminatory censorship. After the Supreme Court first directly ruled on
                        obscene expression and upheld the government’s power to ban it, legal scholar
                        Louis Henkin criticized such censorship as an unconstitutional relic… of [Americans’] religious heritage. He
                        lamented that obscenity, at bottom, is not crime.
                            Obscenity is sin
                        
                        . 
                
                The US Supreme Court’s current guidelines for censoring obscene material
                    constitute one of these secular and seemingly neutral mandates. Established in
                    1973, these guidelines are known as the Miller test. Through the test, states
                    can designate content obscene and therefore unprotected by the First Amendment.
                    To be judged obscene, content must fit not just one or two, but all three of the
                    following characterizations: 
                
                    the average person, applying contemporary community
                            standards, would find that the work, taken as a whole, appeals to the
                            prurient interest
                    
                    
                        the work depicts or describes, in a patently offensive
                            way, sexual conduct or excretory functions specifically defined by
                            applicable state law
                    
                        the work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary,
                            artistic, political, or scientific value
                        .
                
                Again, the First Amendment protects sexual speech, i.e., any form of
                    communication about sexual matters, which passes the Miller test. 
                Yet in and beyond prison, censors frequently ban sexual speech in romance/erotica
                    and manga even when it passes the Miller test. We propose that such double
                    standards stem from censors’ discriminatory appraisals of the sexual speech that
                    these publications engage. To be clear, we do not assume all the enforcers of
                    prison censorship mean to push an ideologically suppressive or anti-woke agenda.
                    Some may, but plenty are just responding to the bureaucratic pressures of
                    maintaining a semblance of order and efficiency in the carceral system . Many of these censors are working
                    without much accountability, clear guidance, or literary or legal expertise, so
                    they likely make snap judgements about what to ban informed by unconscious
                    biases . CCC provides a data-driven mechanism for
                    interrupting such unconscious national biases in US prison censorship by making
                    them conscious.
                
                    2.1 US Censorship and Romance and Erotica
                    As referenced in the Miller test, contemporary communities set norms for what
                        kind of sexual content is socially acceptable. These communities have
                        largely embraced romance and erotica literature. E.L. James’ risqué romance
                            Fifty Shades trilogy accounted for the US’s
                        three top-grossing books between 2019 and 2021 while selling 165 million
                        copies as of 2021 
                        . Although the first book in the trilogy, Fifty Shades of Grey (2011), is now one of the
                        bestselling romance novels worldwide, it is commonly censored in prisons
                        throughout the US. According to CCC’s data, of the 26 states with available
                        banned prison publication data, 15 states’ prisons (i.e., 58 percent of
                        these states’ prisons) ban one or more books within the Fifty Shades trilogy
                        and its extended series. The states with available banned prison
                            publication data and that censor Fifty Shades of Grey include: Arizona,
                            California, Florida, Illinois, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, New
                            Hampshire, New Jersey, North Carolina, Oregon, Texas, Virginia,
                            Washington, and Wisconsin.
                    
                    Outside of the carceral context, the First Amendment protects sexually
                        explicit material if it is not obscene by the Miller test’s standards. Then
                        again, correctional facilities can go beyond the Miller test to deny such
                        material if content threatens to adversely affect the prison environment.
                        The non-profit legal resource and educational provider, The Americans for
                        Effective Law Enforcement, Inc. (AELE) reports that courts have usually upheld bans on sexually explicit materials in
                            prisons that cite legitimate reasons, such as safety and security,
                            prevention of crime, rehabilitation, prevention of sexual harassment and
                            assault, discipline, recidivism and treatment, or institutional
                            order
                        .
                    Yet, in practice, DOC use of this First Amendment exception for prohibiting
                        sexually explicit material seems less than sound. According to Ka’s team’s
                        research, states’ DOC documented rationales for banning romance/erotica
                        publications as sexually explicit vary from state to state while failing to
                        clearly explain why these publications’ flagged content might compromise
                        penal subjects’ safety and wellbeing. Whereas some DOC such as Florida’s and
                        Pennsylvania’s specifically permit the first three books of Fifty Shades,
                        others such as the Connecticut, Kansas, and Washington DOC ban the entire
                        trilogy. Washington DOC records provide the most in-depth account of the
                        reasoning for banning the trilogy that we can find. For instance, Washington
                        DOC notes — justifying its rejection of the first book Fifty Shades of Grey — read: Publication
                            contained sexually explicit depictions of sex acts including but limited
                            to; genital- genital, oral-genital, anal-genital contact/penetration.
                            The [p]ublication also describes, in great detail, a
                            masochistic/sadistic relationship and includes bondage on pages 105-106,
                            113-122, 135- 142, 166-167, 170-175, 193-196, 231-232, 263-268, 274-275,
                            323-328, 349-350, 363-363, 365-366,429-430, 437-438. 
                         Admittedly, this romance series, centering BDSM (bondage,
                        discipline, sadomasochism) dynamics in which a virginal woman protagonist
                        willingly roleplays the sexual servant to a billionaire man, is not, for us,
                        an exemplar of progressive twenty-first-century sexual politics. As The New York Review of Books writer Emily Eakins
                        observes, Despite the risqué trappings, the books hew
                            to the conventions of the nineteenth-century marriage plot
                        . Yet various states’ DOC reasons for censoring
                        it, like those provided by the Washington DOC, seem to reject E. L. James’
                        books not out of concern for their sexual politics, but instead their vivid
                        description of sexual acts and transgressive turn-ons. In contrast,
                        feminists critique her series for glorifying asymmetrical power between a
                        cis-heterosexual woman and man. For instance, they lament that Fifty Shades feeds into some women’s fantasies of
                        sexual submission . At the same time, many
                        feminists defend or even champion the series for unapologetically exploring
                        a woman protagonist’s sexual proclivities and the ways that old gender
                        dynamics seep into modern heterosexual relationships 
                        . Our purpose here is not to judge whether
                            Fifty Shades empowers women. Instead, we
                        raise this romance series example (about which there is more discourse and
                        writing than most) to underscore 1) how empowering women does not stand out
                        as a variable in DOC documented reasoning for the censorship of sexually
                        explicit content, and 2) the inconsistent and questionable censorship logic
                        among state DOC that deems graphic romance/erotica a threat to order in
                        prison.
                    Prohibiting graphic romance and erotica is not neutral or without
                        consequence. Some such literature can be a vehicle for marginalized points
                        of views and when prisons ban such publications, they further undermine the
                        neglected perspectives this kind of romance/erotica represents. Like E.L.
                        James, Zane is another contemporary New York
                            Times bestselling author of these genres whose books many DOC
                        reject. At the time of this writing, her Simon & Schuster publisher page
                        advertises Zane’s 38 romance books . Among her
                        followers, Zane has a reputation as a Black woman writer who operates within
                        the tradition of urban erotica/urban fiction and who discusses desire and
                        sex acts in unvarnished terms .
                        California, Connecticut, Iowa, Oregon, Texas, Virginia, and Wisconsin
                        prisons all ban multiple titles by Zane for sexual explicitness. The most
                        detailed prison records that we can obtain regarding the censorship of
                        Zane’s books due to sexual explicitness hail from Oregon and Virginia DOC
                        explanations of these states’ prison bans of Zane’s Vengeance: A Novel. It is about a pop star, Wicket, struggling
                        against the temptation to get back at the people who traumatized her as a
                        youth to instead overcome her long-held pain and suffering. The Oregon DOC
                        cites Vengeance’s pages 110-112 and 168-169 as
                        those which merit prison censorship, on the grounds of the following codes:
                            
                            1.01: Portrayal of actual or simulated sexual acts or behaviors
                                between human beings
                            1:02: Portrayal of actual or simulated penetration of the vagina
                                or anus, or contact between the mouth and the breast, genitals, or
                                anus.
                            1:03: Portrayal of actual or stimulated stimulation of the breast
                                genitals, or anus. 
                                
                            
                         Indeed, both sets of cited pages describe instances of oral sex,
                        contact with intimate body parts, and masturbation that correspond with
                        these codes. The Virginia DOC, however, does not cite these pages as grounds
                        for censoring Vengeance, but instead identifies
                        two other pages, 51 and 64, for violations A.1 and A.2 under criterion A,
                            Material that emphasizes explicit or graphic
                            depictions or descriptions of sexual acts. On page 51, the
                        protagonist contemplates using the heel of a shoe as a tool of
                        self-penetration, which counts as violation A.1, Actual
                            sexual intercourse (vaginal, anal, or oral) including inanimate object
                            penetration. Both pages 51 and 64 describe characters, secreting
                        bodily fluids as the result of sexual excitement, which counts as violation
                        A.2, Secretion or excretion of bodily fluids or
                            substances in the context of sexual activity or arousal
                        .
                    As in the case of DOC stated reasons for disapproving Fifty Shades, various DOC stated reasons for disapproving
                            Vengeance do not seem to reflect feminist
                        concerns. Justifications for banning both publications target text about
                        sexual acts rather than the sentiments behind them, such as what these acts
                        imply relative to characters’ story arc, social power dynamics, etc. In the
                            Vengeance pages that Oregon and Virginia
                        DOC deem violations, the protagonist narrates consensual sexual encounters,
                        where she takes charge. For example, on pages 64 and 110-112, Wicket seduces
                        a man, declines penetrative intercourse with him, and, in response, he
                        happily follows her lead on to other sexual activity. Also told from her
                        point of view, pages 51 and 168-169 cast Wicket as the dom in a
                        sadomasochistic exchange with two other eager participants.
                    Occasionally, DOC guidelines for prison officials stipulate that they
                        consider material’s merit when determining whether to ban it. This
                        censorship factor is especially notable when it comes to the romance and
                        erotica genres, given that their worth is often subject to public and
                        literary debate as well as social biases. For instance, the Virginia DOC
                        guidelines state an exception for its sexual explicitness censorship
                        category: No publication generally recognized as having
                            literary value should be excluded under this criterion
                        . By banning Vengeance, the Virginia DOC therefore determined it lacks
                        literary merit. Yet discussion around the worth of Zane’s books demonstrates
                        that questions of literary or social value can favor dominant group views at
                        the expense of marginalized ones. Critics often dismiss Zane’s books for
                        their rough and direct writing, which contrasts with the kind of
                        romance/erotica novel that plays up florid language, metaphors or poetic
                        prose . Writerly craft and
                        figurative writing can elevate sexually explicit romance in the eyes of
                        literary tastemakers and potential porn censors who accept risqué content if
                        it has redeeming social value . According to these standards of articulation,
                        Zane’s straightforward tone and lack of literary devices make her books
                        crass and without social value. Yet L.H. Stallings argues that Zane’s blunt
                        narration of sexual subject matter is an expression of epistemic self-defense and erotic
                            sovereignty for Black women whose sexuality is heavily exploited
                        and policed by both white and patriarchal forces . In Stallings’ view, Zane’s text
                        validates the oft-discounted communication style and vantage points of the
                        many Black women who compose its primary readership: Zane writes about the repressed in the language of the repressed.
                            Likewise, her audience is composed of those who speak and read in a
                            similar manner
                        . By reclaiming modes of expression
                        and sexual longing that resonate with numerous Black women and perhaps other
                        demographics, Zane’s directness could enhance its social value. Yet prison
                        censorship guidelines do not encourage censors to weigh such marginalized
                        views of value when deciding what kind of sexual expression is safe for the
                        prison environment. 
                    On the contrary, DOC rejections of Zane’s books and Fifty Shades appear to reflect discriminatory value judgements.
                        More specifically, we propose these publications’ prison censorship is
                        symptomatic of the US patriarchal censorship of women’s sexual speech and
                        portrayals of their sexual desire — both in and beyond prison. The history
                        of US censorship bears out this enduring pattern and CCC’s data on romance/
                        erotica sheds light on this pattern’s contemporary impact in prison.
                    Censors’ anxieties about women’s corruptibility played an outsized role in
                        early US obscenity legislation. In 1821, the first recorded US obscenity
                        trial outlawed John Cleland's Memoirs of a Woman of
                            Pleasure, popularly known as Fanny
                            Hill, the name of its protagonist. As intimated by its title,
                        the novel chronicled a young woman’s sexual awakening and observations . In the tradition of the modern
                        romance novel, Fanny Hill foregrounds a love
                        story and rewards its heroine’s erotic adventures with a happy ending . This is not only a case of the
                        government regulating a sexually provocative account. Fanny Hill’s ban until 1966 and continued challenges thereafter
                        also exemplify US morality crusaders’ long-standing opposition to narratives
                        in which women’s sexual pleasure goes unpunished 
                        . The patriarchal impulse took literal form
                        when, in 1923, father and New York Supreme Court Judge John Ford led the
                        Clean Books legislative charge after finding his 16-year-old daughter with a
                        library copy of D.H. Lawrence’s sexually explicit Women
                            in Love. Had it succeeded, the Clean Books Bill would have
                        extended the definition of obscenity to criminalize a book even if it
                        contained an isolated passage deemed filthy or
                            disgusting, regardless of whether that
                        passage was sexually stimulating 
                        .
                    Along with curbing representations that affirm women’s sexual curiosity, US
                        censorship campaigns against sexual content often thwart women’s sexual
                        self-representation and expression. Although women’s bodies are among the
                        most frequently censored subject matter, through the mid-twentieth century,
                        there were few well-known sexually explicit publications by women. This
                        started to change with Boston Women’s Health Collective’s handbook first
                        published in 1969 as “Women and Their Bodies” and then in subsequent
                        editions with the more famous title Our Bodies,
                            Ourselves (Our Bodies Ourselves). Its women authors sought to
                        provide other women with a resource for understanding their sexuality and
                        reproductive health, not shying away from then taboo topics such as
                        masturbation, premarital sex, and lesbianism 
                        . As the publication gained popularity, political
                        conservatives and evangelists fought to ban it . This instance also speaks to US right-wing moralists’
                        historical use of censorship as a tool for maintaining their power and
                        values through policy initiatives. Over the past couple of centuries, they
                        have attempted to prohibit the publication, production, and circulation of
                        sexual content. To this end, such moralists turned to postal censorship
                        acts, tariff laws, anti-pornography ordinances,
                        etc. 
                        .
                    Anti-pornography measures have especially bolstered the censorship of romance
                        and erotica, and by extension, literature about women’s sexuality. In the
                        1980s, Christian fundamentalists, political conservatives, and
                        pro-censorship feminists set out to ban pornography. The Supreme Court
                        struck down resulting anti-pornography ordinances, ruling that they violated
                        the First Amendment’s guarantee of free speech in accordance with the Miller
                        test . Even so, the political controversy
                        exacerbated the national public stigma surrounding sexual speech. Attempts
                        to restrict it through anti-pornography ordinances pivot around descriptions
                        and depictions of women’s bodies. For instance, an Indianapolis
                            anti-pornography ordinance described pornography as the graphic sexually explicit subordination of women, whether in
                                pictures or in words, declaring such content a civil rights
                            violation against women (Indianapolis Code, 1984, § 16(q)).
                        Consequently, those pushing patriarchal agendas often leverage
                        anti-pornography rhetoric to control representations of women, including
                        women’s representations of other women and themselves. Late
                        twentieth-century feminists for and against porn censorship both feared that
                        such agendas would co-opt anti-porn regulations .  Anti-porn feminists claimed that banning such
                            pornography would support women's pathways to gender equity, by reducing
                            men’s tendency to regard women as sexual objects . Pro-porn feminists, however, cautioned that
                            this censorship would suppress sexually explicit feminist representation
                            of women as well as queer expression . In contrast to religious and political anti-porn
                        conservatives, feminists Andrea Dworkin and Katherine MacKinnon, who
                        co-authored the anti-porn Indianapolis ordinance (1984), intended to limit
                        this censorship to expression that harms women . They defined pornography not as general erotica (that
                        represents or arouses sexual love or desire), but as nine specific types of
                        sexual pictures and/or words that they argue degrade and dehumanize
                            women. Dworkin and MacKinnon write: “Pornography is the graphic sexually explicit subordination
                            of women through pictures and/or words that also includes one or more of
                            the following: (i) women are presented dehumanized as sexual objects,
                            things, or commodities; or (ii) women are presented as sexual objects
                            who enjoy pain or humiliation; or (iii) women are presented as sexual
                            objects who experience sexual pleasure in being raped; or (iv) women are
                            presented as sexual objects tied up or cut up or mutilated or bruised or
                            physically hurt; or (v) women are presented in postures or positions of
                            sexual submission, servility, or display; or (vi) women's body
                            parts-including but not limited to vaginas, breasts, or buttocks- are
                            exhibited such that women are reduced to those parts; or (vii) women are
                            presented as whores by nature; or (viii) women are presented being
                            penetrated by objects or animals; or (ix) women are presented in
                            scenarios of degradation, injury, torture, shown as filthy or inferior,
                            bleeding, bruised, or hurt in a context that makes these conditions
                            sexual” . The
                        ordinance’s anti-degradation definition noticeably differs from the more
                        general, colloquial understanding of pornography, which means material (such as books or a photograph) that depicts
                            erotic behavior and is intended to cause excitement (Merriam
                        Webster Dictionary). It is then not surprising that under the guise of
                        banishing pornography, many censors attack romance and erotica publications,
                        regardless of whether these novels fit Dworkin and MacKinnon’s definition.
                        Managing Director Jonathan Friedman at PEN America laments this phenomenon
                        in the contemporary climate: [a]ctivists and
                            politicians are inflating the notion of what constitutes ‘pornography’
                            beyond all recognition… They are going after romance books, books about
                            puberty or sex education and books that just have LGBTQ
                            characters
                        . One recent example entails various bans on
                        Nora Roberts’ romance novels in red states such as Florida. To discredit her
                        books, right-wing activists vilified them as porn. Yet these books focus on
                        friends pursuing love and contain accounts of only consensual sex premised
                        on respect via language vague enough that a child would
                            have little idea what was happening
                        . Whether or not one agrees with feminist porn
                        censorship, we mean to establish that there is an ongoing track record of US
                        special interest groups mobilizing charged anti-pornography language to
                        minimize who can exercise and access sexual speech. This context likely
                        contributes to prison bans of romance and erotica and by extension women’s
                        sexual speech since this literature is mostly by women authors.
                    The policing of porn and women’s sexual speech raises questions about what
                        constitutes appropriate expressions of desire. Even when content aligns with
                        Dworkin and MacKinnon’s definition of porn, parties that stigmatize and/or
                        censor it among adults risk dictating these standards. In this sense,
                        anti-porn arbiters proceed as if they know what is best for a vast diversity
                        of audiences and how these audiences experience content. Feminist porn
                        movement advocates argue that such anti-porn tendencies are not only
                        presumptuous, but exclusionary because they privilege normative and constricted sexualities, such as sexual acts and identities that promote heterosexuality, marriage, monogamy, and
                            reproduction, while dismissing sexual expression that does not
                        as perverse . Furthermore, when content
                        exceeds normative and constricted sexualities and even when it stays within
                        these bounds, audiences do not perceive expressions of desire in literal or
                        homogenous ways. For instance, feminist porn scholars explor[e] sexual ideas and acts that may be fraught, confounding, and
                            deeply disturbing to some, and liberating and empowering to
                            others
                        . Likewise, scholar Janice Radway finds
                        that readers’ interpretations of content about desire is complex and
                        contingent. She conducted a reception-based ethnography of a midwestern
                        community of women who consumed romance upholding traditional
                        cis-hetero-patriarchal values. These romance books might appear to demean
                        women’s agency, but Radway concludes they granted their readers emotional
                        and psychological support . Plot points
                        associated with regressive gender politics, such as heroines in relative positions of weakness and violent men,
                        resonated with the readers not because the women took pleasure in these
                        obstacles, but rather because they got to accompany the heroine as she
                        resolved these obstacles en route to happily ever after. This process helped
                        the readers understand and cop with the cis-hetero-patriarchal limitations
                        that conditioned their own lives .
                        Radway’s study and feminist porn scholarship, along with the previously
                        mentioned cases of Fifty Shades and Zane’s
                        books are telling. They establish that the nuanced social functions of
                        romance and erotica should not be taken for granted. 
                    To summarize, we believe at least three factors underlie why US prisons’
                        frequent censorship of romance and erotica publications most impacts women’s
                        sexual speech. First, these contemporary genres are dominated by women
                        authors. Banning publications in these genres means banning largely
                        women-authored publications. This correlation bears out in Ka’s most
                        accurate datasets of state DOC censorship (figure 12). Second, romance and
                        erotica cater to the historically suppressed themes of women’s sexual desire
                        and sexual liberation. Objections to these themes motivated important early
                        US obscenity debates and more recent anti-pornography censorship efforts,
                        including those aimed at romance and erotica. Third, the well-documented US
                        history of patriarchal campaigns against these genres helps explain the
                        understudied yet prominent phenomenon of US prison bans on them. 
                
                
                    2.2 US Censorship and Manga
                    In addition to revealing that numerous prison bans on romance and erotica
                        detract from incarcerated people’s access to women’s sexual speech, Ka’s
                        preliminary data analysis shows that prisons throughout the nation often
                        reject manga. In so doing, these prisons reject a great deal of publications
                        by people of East Asian descent who make up the majority of the banned
                        manga’s authors. Just as restrictions on romance and erotica outside the
                        carceral system relate to those inside it, prisons’ penchant for prohibiting
                        manga reflects this publication type’s commonly censored status within US
                        society at large.
                    To some degree, manga’s comic book format accounts for these restrictions.
                        Comics are highly susceptible to obscenity charges due to the misguided
                        notion that they are categorically children’s entertainment 
                        
                        ). This perception undermines their
                        serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value, which the Miller
                        test requires censors to consider. Moreover, the presumption that comics
                        target the youngest members of society rather than its adult members means
                        that courts are more likely to apply harsher community standards to this
                        material. The Miller test justifies harsher standards for children’s
                        content. At the same time, censors cite anti-pornography legislation that
                        prohibits sexualized representation of minors for both children’s and adult
                        content to rationalize their strict appraisals of manga. Even so, as we will
                        discuss, Americans’ tendency to misconstrue manga’s target audience and
                        subjects often prevent US censors from applying these standards to the
                        publication type fairly. 
                    Manga bans also demonstrate how US censorship policies can contain the
                        diversification of cultural content. At the turn of the twentieth century,
                        overall US community standards around sexual expression broadened as
                        developments in mass media and eventually the Internet circulated suggestive
                        and even brazenly risqué content, such as pornography . Meanwhile, the rise of the Internet and global
                        markets helped spread Japanese popular culture. Manga is a kind of comic
                        stemming from this culture with long story lines and complex graphics . These publications came to
                        dominate the East Asian comic book market. In 2007, manga started making US
                        best-seller lists . Manga
                        encompasses an enormous range of genres and only select subsets of them
                        portray young-looking characters in sexual ways. Yet as national attitudes
                        around sexual content relaxed in the aughts, US prosecutors, customs agents,
                        and other law enforcement increasingly charged those in possession of manga
                        publications with obscenity regardless of whether the publications belonged
                        to these subsets 
                        .
                    We believe the forces behind this uptick in manga censorship are multifold.
                        At least three probable factors include:
                    
                        1) The 2003 anti-child pornography PROTECT Act and the flawed
                            application of its obscene child pornography component  The
                                PROTECT of the PROTECT act stands for Prosecutorial Remedies and
                                Other Tools to End the Exploitation of Children Today .
                        
                        The Comic Book Legal Defense Fund (CBLDF) explains that this act
                            strengthened law enforcement’s ability to prevent and respond to child
                            sex offenses. At the same time, it instituted the category of obscene child pornography, which criminalizes
                            a non-photographic visualization of any kind that depicts a minor engaging in sexually explicit conduct and is
                                obscene
                            
                            . Although some adult manga entails sexual
                            representations of characters who appear youthful, US governmental
                            actors mistakenly equate manga in general with youth and sexual deviancy
                                . 
                    
                    
                        2) Different cultural perceptions of both taboo sexual expression and
                            manga
                        When it comes to sexual content, in Japan, nudity, certain expressions of
                            sensual intimacy (such as those between humans and non-human creatures),
                            and escapist fantasy in adult cultural products are more socially
                            sanctioned than in the US. Such distinctions can lead non-East Asian
                            viewers who are unfamiliar with a sexual trope in manga to view it as
                            perverse. In contrast, East Asian audiences who recognize the same trope
                            as a well-established part of their culture’s artistic and popular
                            production might regard it as tame . 
                        Oregon DOC’s censorship of the hit manga A Centaur’s
                                Life underscores how, when presented with culturally
                            unfamiliar scenarios that involve nudity or light sexual content, US
                            censors are quick to reject it, even when these scenarios represent
                            socially acceptable approaches to sexual issues in Japan. The series
                                A Centaur’s Life (2011 — ) by Kei
                            Murayama, is shōjo manga (manga primarily
                            targeted at pre-adolescent girls and young women). It is set at a high
                            school in a world that resembles contemporary Japan but is inhabited
                            only by mythological creatures. The protagonist is a high school-aged
                            centaur girl . Japanese writers and
                            artists have long embraced human-animal hybrids from the Greek tradition
                            and others. Jingai (non-human humanoid)
                            characters in general and centaur characters in particular have enjoyed
                            increased prominence in Japanese manga since 2010 
                            . According to comparative
                            literature scholar Jessy Escande, by centering characters that are
                            visibly proximate to but other than human, recent manga with jingai often give manga creators and audiences
                            an inviting way to grapple with the challenging relationship between the self and the Other in a society [Japan]
                                that still values homogeneity and conformism
                            . A Centaur’s
                                Life focuses on the centaur protagonist’s otherness-related problems that are typical of a human
                                adolescent, such as teenage puberty, dating anxieties, and
                            queer crushes . On these
                            matters, as Escande sees it, A Centaur’s
                                Life provides sexual education through socially palatable
                            narratives of jinga with horns, halos, and
                                tails, thereby responding to Japanese
                            students’ disappointment in their wanting high school sexual education
                            in the human world . A Centaur’s Life  volume 9 directly explores
                            teen dilemmas such as romantic feelings between friends and queer desire
                            perceived to go against the norm. A satyr girl Nadeshiko confesses to
                            her friend: If only you were a boy, Akira-chan. I’m
                                sure I’d be asking you to kiss me
                            . They never kiss or touch each other in a
                            sexual manner, but Nadeshiko encounters her crush Akira, a tomboyish
                            part-satyr, part-imp girl, in a somewhat provocative way when picking
                            Akira up for school. Nadeshiko finds Akira still dozing off in her
                            sleeping gown. It is scrunched up over her neck, partially exposing
                            Akira’s not-yet-developed breasts in one panel and an undifferentiated
                            bump between her bare legs (hinting at but not depicting her vulva) in
                            another. Acknowledging the impropriety of the situation, Nadeshiko
                            exclaims: That’s no way for a lady to sleep, by the
                                way. Akira shrugs the comment off: It’s
                                hot in here. Besides, we’re all girls here, so what’s the
                                problem? Nadeshiko lets it go and helps Akira get ready.
                            This scene shows the two jingai girls on
                            the cusp of adulthood navigating both increased societal expectations of
                            modesty and new feelings of sexual tension prompted by partial nudity.
                            Whereas this material takes on an educational tenor for adolescents in
                            Japan, US censors are more prone to object to it as an inappropriately
                            sexual representation of youth. Indeed, Oregon DOC prohibits this volume
                            9 for portraying sexual acts of a minor
                            
                            .
                        Oregon DOC bans volume 10 of the series for this same offense as well as
                                simulated or threatened [sex/ual] acts
                            
                            . Although this DOC report does not cite
                            specific pages for these acts, it likely refers to the part of volume 10
                            where characters’ sexual curiosity is most visibly on display: when the
                                jinga girls relax in hot springs
                            together. No sex acts unfold there. The characters, however, are
                            unclothed and, as girls undergoing puberty, they jokingly compare
                            breasts. One even touches another’s. When the centaur girl Hime helps
                            her friend, an imp-girl Nozomi out of the tub, Nozomi accidentally
                            knocks into Hime’s chest. For US censors, the tub setting might
                            instantly imply an erotic context that heightens the sensuality of this
                            comedic run-in and the youth’s light-hearted consideration of their
                            maturing bodies to the level of censorship. In contrast, Japanese
                            traditions of public baths linked to ritual and religious purification
                            (associated with Shinto and Buddhist practices) reduce communal
                            bathing’s sexual connotations. History books, TV shows, and movies about
                            the Edo period as well as celebrated national works from that era, such
                            as Hokusai Manga’s Public Bath (1815-1849)
                            woodblock print, visualize these settings as routine rather than risqué
                            environments. Communal bathing in hot springs remains a popular Japanese
                            approach to cleansing the body and easing the mind . 
                        Reductive US perceptions of manga overall also encourage censors’
                            overgeneralized views of its sexual extremeness. Manga is a massive
                            industry in Japan and elsewhere for all manner of narrative — news,
                            education, sports, science fiction, romance, etc. — geared toward
                            different audiences . This
                            publication type cannot be reduced to one sensibility or age group.
                            Jason Thompson’s encyclopedic manga guidebook identifies over a thousand
                            genres (2007). There is a vast array of manga publications, some feature
                            sexual content and many do not. 
                        DOC bans on commercially successful, sexually tame manga geared at youth
                            such as Life of a Centaur, highlight
                            dubious prison censorship practices around manga publications. We do not
                            deny that sexually explicit manga with devastating gender politics,
                            pornographic representations of minors, and/or sexually degrading
                            depictions exist. They do. Some of the best-known examples can be found
                            in hentai manga, which is an intentionally
                            pornographic type, and hardcore lolicon
                            manga, which sexualize prepubescent girls. Revenge porn-centered
                            narratives with violence against women, such as Prison Experiment (2016) and Redo of
                                Healer (2017 — ), express striking forms of misogyny that
                            some manga contain . 
                        Moreover, feminist critiques of erotic and non-erotic manga abound
                            because, like countless other artistic and entertainment formats the
                            world over, manga often marks sexist double standards. For instance,
                            manga artists’ tendency to portray girls and women characters with
                            enormous breasts, wide hips, tiny waistlines, and long legs risks
                            sexually objectifying them and perpetuating unattainable feminine beauty
                            standards 
                            . Yet, in recent decades manga creators
                            increasingly either incorporate these double standards to undermine them
                            or depart from them, offering alternative progressive views of gender
                                .
                        As with romance and erotica publications, numerous manga publications
                            include risqué elements and/or reinforce patriarchal stereotypes while
                            also unsettling confining gendered expectations. On the one hand, the
                            extent to which these kinds of manga publications promote views of
                            gender equality is up for debate. On the other hand, the US prison bans
                            on a lot of these publications for sexual explicitness are suspect. Many
                            such manga with a combination of progressive and regressive gender
                            politics, in our eyes, readily meet the requirements of the Miller test
                            without evidentially undermining prison order and safety. One such
                                example is the sci-fi manga Ghost in the
                                    Shell (1989-1990) by Masamune Shirow, censored by Oregon
                                DOC for sexual explicitness (Oregon Department of Corrections,
                                2024). This manga’s gender politics can be understood as regressive
                                for fetishizing its protagonist cyborg police officer Major Motoko
                                Kusanagi’s stereotypically idealized slim, yet voluptuous feminine
                                physique . At the same time, some hail
                                    Ghost in the Shell’s exploration of
                                hi-tech gender and identity fluidity for its progressive gender
                                politics . Oregon DOC materials do not
                                clearly specify what Ghost in the Shell
                                content is unacceptably sexual, but it seems the DOC objects to the
                                manga’s slightly sensual yet relatively sanitized portrayal of Major
                                Kusanagi’s bare cyborg body. Even so, we doubt this portrayal
                                threatens to ignite disorder in the prison environment.
                    
                    
                        3) Lack of consideration for publications’ societal value (cultural,
                            artistic, literary, etc.)
                        
                            Berserk (1989-), a manga series censored in
                            nine states’ prisons, explores matters of substance with highly skilled
                                storytelling. These nine states include California, Colorado,
                                Connecticut, North Carolina, Oregon, Texas, Virginia, Washington, and
                                Wisconsin. In Japan and manga circles, people recognize it as
                            an artistic masterwork. They compare the dark fantastical beauty in
                                Berserk’s pages to Dante’s Inferno illustrations and the Dutch
                            Renaissance paintings by Hieronymus Bosch. As these artworks, Berserk  tackles serious subject matter about
                            the human condition that extends to eye-catching sexual content: group
                            sex, sexual assault, and rape . Berserk condemns the sexual violence it
                            illustrates and attends to characters’ emotional trauma from it. While
                            noting that original creator Kentaro Miura depicts sexual violence with
                            more sensitivity than most of his contemporaries, some fans lament that
                                Berserk still glamorizes it by drawing
                            attention to the beauty of women victims’ bodies in such scenes . Virginia’s DOC is among
                            those which ban Berserk for sexual
                            explicitness. The state’s DOC overtly instructs prison censors to weigh
                            works’ overall merits, stipulating that [n]o
                                publication generally recognized as having literary value
                            should be rejected for sexual explicitness . Virginia DOC prohibits all
                            of Berserk’s now 42 volumes anyway. This is
                            implicitly a dismissal of the series acclaimed cultural, craft, and
                            storytelling qualities. Virginia DOC and other states’ DOC failure to
                            wholistically evaluate a work’s societal worth when making censorship
                            decisions is noteworthy. This negligence reflects the narrow cultural
                            thinking that informs prison censorship around sexual material. 
                        To sum up, we believe that the PROTECT Act, cultural differences between
                            the US and Japan (including overgeneralized US perceptions of manga as a
                            sexual entertainment format), and US prison censorship protocols’ lack
                            of consideration for publications societal value variously promote
                            xenophobic US prison censorship of manga. Xenophobia refers to fear of
                            or dislike for the foreign or culturally unfamiliar. Time and time
                            again, US censors’ ignorance about manga (whether willed or not) has led
                            them to misinterpret a manga’s sexual character. They then excessively
                            deem manga publications as harmful, as worthy of fear. The xenophobic
                            trends of sexually-explicit-based prison bans are also bound up with
                            white supremacist ones, given that white supremacy fuels orientializing
                            stereotypes of East Asians as hypersexual. Cultural critic and
                                theorist Edward Saïd, famously explained orientalizing stereotypes
                                as a function of Orientalism, a European colonial perspective that
                                casts non-white Eastern people and their cultures as lascivious,
                                strange, and irrational . The
                            xenophobic and racist dimensions of manga prison censorship are in
                            keeping with broader discrimination that protects US white cis-
                            hetero-patriarchal hierarchies in the carceral context 
                            
                            .
                    
                
            

                Conclusion 
                Among DH projects about the prison industrial complex, CCC is distinct for its
                    critical artistic construction led by inquiry into social bias. CCC partakes in
                    Ka’s socially engaged art practice, experiments with information architecture,
                    and tracks the US prison censorship of numerous publication types for further
                    inspection. Its unique web design promotes not only an interactive
                    user-experience, but also an evocative one, as its visuals reference the
                    governmental and computational contexts of its own data. Moreover, CCC invites
                    users to explore perspectives that prison publication bans target and why. As
                    the website partially now shows, the database and its categories reveal
                    relationships between prison officials’ censorship justifications, censored
                    publications and their types, and censored authors’ social identities at the
                    local institutional, state, and national level within the US. Concentrating on
                    the sexually explicit justification for censorship, CCC’s initial findings
                    uncover widespread banning habits that devalue views associated with women’s and
                    East Asians’ sexual speech (through the prison censorship of romance/erotica
                    literature and manga). CCC’s ability to make these two overlooked prison
                    censorship patterns detectable illustrates how Ka’s database, and by extension
                    DH more broadly, can galvanize efforts to articulate and agitate against
                    discrimination within the prison industrial complex. 
                By animating the database’s inquiry into social biases through her artistic
                    treatment of it, Ka illuminates how DH and socially engaged art practices can be
                    mutually enriching. The former offers data-driven methods for strengthening the
                    analytical aspects and reach of the latter beyond the art field. In turn,
                    socially engaged art’s creative means of reckoning with social justice issues
                    can invigorate DH strategies.
            
