Title:  Automatic Identification of Types of Alterations in
               Historical Manuscripts
Volume:  015
Issue:  2
Date:  15 November 2021
Abstract:  
            
            Alterations in historical manuscripts such as letters represent a promising field of
               research. On the one hand, they help understand the construction of text. On the
               other hand, topics that are being considered sensitive at the time of the manuscript
               gain coherence and contextuality when taking alterations into account, especially in
               the case of deletions. The analysis of alterations in manuscripts, though, is a
               traditionally very tedious work. In this paper, we present a machine learning-based
               approach to help categorize alterations in documents. In particular, we present a new
               probabilistic model (Alteration Latent Dirichlet Allocation, alterLDA in
               the following) that categorizes content-related alterations. The method proposed here
               is developed based on experiments carried out on the digital scholarly edition Berlin Intellectuals, for which alterLDA
               achieves high performance in the recognition of alterations on labelled data. On
               unlabelled data, applying alterLDA leads to interesting new insights
               into the alteration behavior of authors, editors and other manuscript contributors,
               as well as insights into sensitive topics in the correspondence of Berlin
               intellectuals around 1800. In addition to the findings based on the digital scholarly
               edition Berlin Intellectuals, we present a general
               framework for the analysis of text genesis that can be used in the context of other
               digital resources representing document variants. To that end, we present in detail
               the methodological steps that are to be followed in order to achieve such results,
               giving thereby a prime example of a Machine Learning application in the Digital
               Humanities.
         
Full Body Text: 

            Editorial prolegomenon
            Classical scholarly editing has a long-standing tradition in distinguishing between
               different types of editions . The characteristics of
               specific edition forms usually align with the intended readership, but they also take
               into account a bibliographic history that tends to differentiate more and more along
               time according to linguistic areas. In the German-speaking area, historical-critical
               editions that comprise an extensive historical-critical apparatus are often
               distinguished - with a clear hierarchical difference - from so-called study editions
                  . The common denominator between these two types of
               editions is that they aim to offer a reliable text as a
               central component . In contrast to these types of
               editions, it is also possible to publish a reproduction of the manuscript image
               (facsimile edition). Plachta points out, however, that a facsimile edition is no
               substitute for the above two types of editions .
            Another way of differentiating between types of editions is to compare the intention
               in the text construction, which corresponds to the philosophy according to which the
               anglo-saxon area has mainly structured their approach. According to Andrews, the old methods that have their root in classical
                  philology strive to assemble the ideal text,
               while the new philology seeks to find the real text . In this conception,
               the ideal text tries to approach the author's intention, while the real text seeks to
               emulate the existing sources. 
            The type of edition an editor goes for is often defined by economic factors in
               printed editions, while in digital editions, this limitation can be obsolete in terms
               of the amount of pages available, or located on a different level (for instance due
               to the price of specific, cost-expensive technologies). More generally, in digital
               scholarly editions, differentiation characteristics can be renegotiated. As Andrews
               states, there are hardly any technical limitations in digital editions with regard to
               the size of the apparatus, and the number and resolution of facsimiles provided .
            This is not the only specificity that distinguishes digital from print editions. They
               also are machine-readable. With digital editions being available in digital formats,
               computers can not only handle repetitive tasks in the creation of the edition , they can also be used to perform tasks that use the
               edition as source material. The most obvious example for this type of use is the
               full-text search, but the machine-readable form also allows the creation of a
               multitude of statistics and customed visualizations with very little effort . Furthermore, Ralle emphasizes that the digitization of
               editions and scholarly editing in general allow to pay special attention to the
               processual aspects of the edition . An edition can be
               extended or enriched after it has been initially published and does not need to be
                  finished at a specific moment in time. A digital edition can be modified
               dynamically, for instance like the Carl-Maria-von-Weber-Gesamtausgabe with a front
               page field called What happened today? that connects to all instances of the
               current date in the corpus and highlights them - a content that changes from day to
               day and offers a different approach to the corpus than the traditional keyword
               search. Also, user interaction can be funneled back into the edition, for example
               when subsequent publications that are based on the edition are listed there.
               Interaction in and of itself can also be included: the search behaviour of users can
               be analyzed for better future suggestions or the edition can be enriched by
               third-party data. Every user of a digital edition, whether computer or human, is thus
               potentially able to engage in one form of editorial participation or the other 
               
               .
            These special features of digital editions allow for paleography  to reach out to research questions hence unexplored
               in the Humanities due to the lack of tools and corpora allowing an automatic
               evaluation of alteration phenomena. It enables for instance to thoroughly reconstruct
               the history of a document by considering physical traces of alterations, meaning any
               smaller or larger text modifications on the manuscript, performed either by the
               author himself or herself or by others (see Methods).
               This approach provides insights into the way in which authors, editors and other
               contributors work together, hence impacting our understanding of text genesis as a
               collaborative process.
            In order to achieve substantial results in this field of research, fast and
               well-structured access to the document variants is required. Digital editions
               presenting the manuscript alterations allow to focus on diplomatic transcription or
               facsimile, as opposed to print editions where the focus is on a single copy text,
               itself usually optimized for readability. Examples of digital editions representing
               the document history include faustedition.net
               , bovary.fr
               , beckettarchive.org
               , and the edition that provided the background for the
               methodology we propose here: the digital scholarly edition Letters and texts. Intellectual Berlin around 1800,
               berliner-intellektuelle.eu
               , BI in the following. 
         

            Introduction
            Letters and Texts. Intellectual Berlin around 1800 is a
               digital scholarly edition of manuscripts by men and women writers of the late 18th
               and early 19th century. The connection these writers have to the intellectual
               networks in the Prussian capital city are either direct (authors living and writing
               in Berlin) or indirect (editorial or epistolar relationship with Berlin-based
               intellectuals). The originality of this digital scholarly edition is that it is
               neither author-centered nor genre-based, but presents different types of selected
               manuscripts that shed light on the intellectual activity of Berlin at the turn of the
               18th to the 19th century. This editorial choice is presented at length in , where light is also shed on the uniqueness of the
               Prussian Capital City in the context of the period. While correspondences play a key
               role in the edition, they are considered as a part of the circulation of ideas that
               is at the core of the project, so that letters, and more generally egodocuments, are
               complemented by drafts of either literary works (among which two major romantic
               texts), scholarly writings (one dissertation) or administrative documents (related to
               the development of the Berlin University). A first editorial phase (2010-2016)
               allowed to publish manuscripts that cover different thematic areas and historical
               phases of the development of intellectual Berlin. They were selected based mainly on
               their scholarly relevance and on their accessibility (the publication policy of
               archives holding manuscripts having a major impact on their integration to a digital
               edition that displays a facsimile like this one does). Four main topics have emerged
               in this first phase: French, e.g. Huguenot Culture, Berlin University, Literary
               Romanticism and Women Writers. Depending on the topics, the letters published were
               complemented by other types of texts that document the circulation of ideas and of
               literary and scholarly works in the late 18th and early 19th century. 
            The edition can be browsed by theme, by author, by period, by holding institution, or
               by date. The single document can be displayed on one or two columns presenting at the
               user’s choice a facsimile of the current manuscript page, a diplomatic transcription,
               a reading version, the metadata, the entities occurring on the page and the XML file
               corresponding to the document. In this first development phase, 248 documents and 17
               authors were encoded and presented in BI. In Figure 1, a quantitative summary of the BI corpus is
               given, which consists of introductory figures for the whole corpus in terms of size,
               temporal span and number of alterations and detailed information about individual
               authors.
            
               Quantitative summary of the BI corpus. Subfigure (a) shows the number of
                  documents grouped by each author. Adelbert Chamisso holds the largest share of
                  documents. In (b), the actual number of characters by author shows a slightly
                  different picture, instead of Chamisso, J. Euler has the largest portion. In
                  Subfigure (c), the alterations in terms of number of changed characters
                  between different versions of the documents are depicted for each author. A large
                  number of total characters of an author does not necessarily mean a lot of
                  alterations. Although Euler encompasses the largest number of characters there are
                  close to no alterations in the documents he authored. In (d), total counts for the
                  whole BI corpus are stated to show the extent of the annotational effort. In (e),
                  the temporal distribution of the creation of the documents is shown for the whole
                  corpus (top) and for each individual author (bottom). In this subfigure ((e),
                  bottom), the number of documents created in each year is encoded in the intensity
                  of the color.
               
            
            A major novelty about the BI edition is that it combines genetic edition and entity
               annotation in order to gain insight in intellectual networks, on the actual editing
               process of manuscripts (of literary and scholarly works) and on the discourse about
               this editing process (letters – most letters are interestingly also partly
               transformed into literary works in their own right and subject to editing). The
               genetic encoding gives precise information regarding deletions and additions in the
               manuscript text. The BI encoding guidelines make extensive use of the following
               specific sections of the TEI (P5)The encoding guidelines can be found at berliner-intellektuelle.eu/encoding-guidelines.pdf guidelines
               additionally to the standard structure (Chapter 1-4): Manuscript Description (Chapter
               10, https://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/MS.html),
               Representation of Primary Sources (Chapter 11, https://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/PH.html) and Names,
               Dates, People, and Places (Chapter 13, https://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/ND.html), which offers
               the possibility to markup text alterations with tags such as add and
                  del.
            As already mentioned, the BI Edition features annotations on the genesis of the
               documents (genetic edition), which, being a digital edition, are machine-readable.
               The core question we will address in the following is therefore whether machine
               learning models 
               
                that analyze the alterations within the documents can
               be used to gain new insights into author, editor, and archivist practices, as well as
               practices of the intellectual societies in the document’s creation time. The
               investigation of this question is only made possible by the meticulous (digital)
               annotation of the historical documents that provides previously unavailable
               enrichments and perspectives on the sources. 
            From the perspective of edition theory Ehrmann stresses that the importance of
               analyzing the alterations in manuscripts for literary studies and scholarly editing
               lies not only in the fact that they allow an insight into the author's writing
               process in the case of author-made changes, but also in the fact that they help
               identify the respective contribution in the case of co-authorships . The first question that arises when examining every
               alteration is the question of the underlying reason, be it for a minor correction of
               mistakes or a wide-ranging content-related alteration. This leads to the question of
               the originator of the alteration and, as Ehrmann stresses, whether the alteration is
               wanted by the author . In the specific case of an edition
               of correspondence, the intended readership is bound to change dramatically in the
               aftermath of publication. A letter that was originally written to a friend is made
               public to a large readership and in the process of preparation, the editor applies
               alterations to the original letter, most of the time with a correction phase on the
               original manuscript itself. This is the case for many manuscripts in the BI edition,
               commented on as follows by the editors: One characteristic
                     of letters is that you generally are not the first one to read them when you
                     discover them in an archive. Not only have they been addressed to a person or a
                     group of persons in the first place [..], many of the letters we at least are
                     working on have already been edited in the last centuries. But not in extenso,
                     no: they have been abridged, overwritten, corrected according to the
                     expectation of the audience in the time that they were edited.
                  
            Moreover, the novel machine learning method (alterLDA) presented here also offers new
               opportunities for many other areas of automated analysis of variants of sources,
               especially within the Digital Humanities. AlterLDA is based on the topic model latent
               Dirichlet allocation (LDA). Topic Modeling has proven immensely
                  popular in Digital Humanities
               . LDA is particularly popular in the DH because it is
               suitable for explorative text analysis. With the automated compilation of word lists
               by LDA, new topics can be identified in large text corpora whose existence was
               previously unknown. In this context, it almost always forms the first analysis step
               on text data, but it can in fact also be used for non-textual data 
               . In addition to LDA, which provides the identification of
               the overall relevant topics of the corpus to be examined and the specific topics of
               the individual documents of the corpus, alterLDA is particularly concerned with the
               variants of the documents. The starting conditions for this work are as follows: from
               the point of view of edition theory, the question of document variants is of major
               importance, and this has not yet been sufficiently investigated with Distant Reading
               methods. From a methodological point of view, there is a very widespread Topic Model
               (LDA), which is already recognized and accepted practice in the Digital Humanities.
               In this paper we therefore close the gap by adapting LDA in order to model document
               variants.
            The processual aspects of text genesis in the sources underlying the edition are thus
               highlighted and supported by the processual aspects of the edition itself. If a
               document in its past has already been prepared for publication by an editor, then his
               or her notes in the TEI-XML are annotated in the same way as when the editors of the
               BI Edition leave notes: with the <note>-tag. 
            Parts may be deemed inappropriate for publishing to a broader readership at a certain
               place and time due to their political or religious context, or for revealing private
               information about a person or a group.
            The application on the BI corpus is particularly interesting because the latter
               consists mainly of letters, which, especially around 1800 in Germany, exhibit a
               strong tension between public and private sphere. The framework presented here
               includes four methods that range from basic, well established, rule-based methods to
               a specialized, novel machine learning method (alterLDA) that was developed for
               exactly this purpose. From a methodological point of view, this is a challenge for
               all disciplines involved, conceived as a scenario optimized so that all sides benefit
               from each other. Finally, the newly introduced method is also applied to discover
               alteration candidates in the documents that are not yet altered. These findings led
               to, and hopefully will continue to fuel, interesting discussions on parts of the
               edition that were unnoticed thus far.
            Due to machine readability, documents in digital editions can be modified by computer
               programs in such an algorithmic way that they are transformed into something else.
               This transformation is described by Stephen Ramsay in the concept of Algorithmic
               Criticism:
            Any reading of a text that is not a recapitulation of that text relies on a heuristic
               of radical transformation. The critic who endeavors to put forth a reading
               puts forth not the text, but a new text in which the data has been paraphrased,
               elaborated, selected, truncated, and transduced .
            The methods to which Ramsay refers here, e.g. tf-idf normalization, are mostly
               deterministic methods. In this work, however, a probabilistic method is used to
               transform the documents and their variants, which uses previously collected data and
               relates the observations to it. Thus, these statistical transformations resemble
               human reading more than purely deterministic approaches and therefore foster the
               methodological concept of the “radical transformation” described within the
               Algorithmic Criticism towards a more general criticsm that includes non-explicit
               algorithms.
            This transformation in an algorithmic way is a very standard technique (e.g. counting
               co-appearances of speakers in scenes of a play). However in recent years Machine
               Learning models are being used more broadly for e.g. Named Entity Recognition 
               . The patterns that are used to identify entities are
               not stated explicitly by a programmer but are learned from the data at training time.
               In general, Machine Learning methods would then be methodologically less strict than
               classical explicit algorithmic transformations and therefore be possibly also more
               human-like. However, when giving up this explicitness there has to be a more rigorous
               evaluation of the machine’s output. For many applications, like the one presented in
               this work, we therefore rely on the evaluation by machine learning and humanities
               scholars, who can employ methods for interpreting and explaining machine learning
               models .
         

            Methods
            In this section, the machine learning methods for identifying the reason for a given
               alteration are presented, by first introducing the general data analysis pipeline.
               Then, we specify precise definitions of the most relevant concepts for alterations.
               After specifying the preprocessing steps, the novel alterLDA model is introduced. It
               is designed to analyze the most interesting, yet most complex types of alterations.
               Before the methodologies of each step are explained in further detail, the
               definitions for the most important and most frequently used terms are given here.
            Given an arbitrary version of a document, we define an alteration to be a local group
               of added and/or deleted symbols that is performed by the author of an alteration.
               Basically, any symbol appearing in the document could be regarded as a single
               addition, but the state of the manuscript at the time of the investigation often
               makes it impossible to identify beyond doubt which groups of symbols belong to a
               particular writing session. The same problem exists with deletions: Was the sentence
               completed first, or did the author pause in the middle and correct something before
               completing the sentence? In BI, additions and deletions are considered as such when
               they clearly stand out, for example when they are crossed out or written to the
               margin. Sometimes co-occurring additions and deletions are also referred to as
               replacements. The alteration may range from a single character to whole passages of
               the document and can even be a local group with non-altered symbols in between. An
               alteration author is a single person or institution that alters the document,
               possibly the primary author him or herself. The alteration author has an alteration
               reason for which he or she decides to alter the document. This is a very specific
               reason, for example the alteration author thinks that a particular word is spelled
                  differently or a real person which is referred to in the document may not
                  want to be recognized by the readers, so this part is censored.
            Each alteration has a formal and content-related portion with varying emphasis. For
               example, if the author of an alteration changes the spelling of a single word this
               would not change the meaning of the document in most cases. On the contrary, adding
               multiple sentences to a document may change the content of the document
               significantly. Of course, whether an alteration is rather positioned on the form side
               or on the content side of the axis depends on the point of view of the recipient.
               Hence, the proposed method takes into account the formal changes of the document as
               well as the content-related changes. Smaller alterations tend to have a rather formal
               aspect, where longer alterations almost always are content-related.
            The set of alterations can be broken down into different categories with respect to
               their alteration reason. One group of alterations is (1) the group of paratexts, for
               example archival notes, such as numberings or dates, or stamps and seals of the
               library or archival institution. Another group of alterations is (2) corrections of
               mistakes which consists in spelling alterations, grammatical changes and other
               corrections. (3) The third group contains stylistic alterations, for example
               replacing a token with its synonym or rearranging the word order. Of course, changing
               the word order is sometimes more than just a stylistic change, but one could e.g.
               begin a sentence with Es bedarf daher [..] as well as with Daher bedarf es
                  [..] with very similar intentions. The last group of alterations which we call
               (4) content-related alterations incorporate alterations that either add new
               information to the document or suppress information that was present in the document
               before.
            
               Flow chart of machine learning pipeline with four example alterations. The
                  stream of documents is analysed in four steps that identify different reasons of
                  alterations as depicted in the panel at the top. In the panel at the bottom, the
                  details of the individal alterations are presented. Each alteration has a unique
                  appearance and unique characteristics, like the type of ink and the way in which
                  it fits into the surrounding script. The presented preview of the facsimiles are
                  shown in greater detail in Figure 9, Figure 10, Figure 11 and
                     Figure 12
               
            
            
               Figure 2 illustrates how the identification method
               works. All alterations are put into the analysis pipeline, and after the initial
               distinction between author alterations and non-author alterations, the four tests for
               different types are performed on each alteration. As an example, there are four
               alterations depicted in the illustration that are fed into the model. A detailed
               explanation for an identification of the three non-content-related types of
               modifications is given in the appendix. By elimination of all other possible
               categories, the remaining alterations are of the content-related category. There are
               still a variety of reasons in this category worthwhile to identify. Rather than the
               general category we aim for providing a distinct reason for each alteration. The
               fourth alteration which is marked in red is a longer deletion and a detailed
               facsimile is shown in Figure 2. It is performed with a
               pencil which is different from the primary ink of the letter. It deals with the
               author’s sickness and with the sickness of the author’s mother. The extent of the
               alteration already indicates that this is not a correction of a mistake and since the
               part that is deleted is not replaced by anything else, it can be assumed that this
               alteration changes the amount of information provided. It is thus to be classified as
               a content-related alteration. At this point it is still to be identified for which
               specific reason the document has been altered. With alterLDA, the alteration is
               assigned to one of a set of candidate reasons as a final step, in this case Sickness-reason.
         

            Related Work
            We convey a generative topic model, that is based on Latent Dirichlet Allocation  and that is able to take into account the structural
               information of alterations. LDA is a widely used topic model that extends Latent
               Semantic Indexing  which is capable of assigning a
               distribution of topics to a document instead of only a single topic. LDA takes
               advantage of the fact that a text is organized in documents. This structural
               information is the reason for LDA to function. Based on this structure of documents,
               LDA can learn which words tend to co-occur and thus have a relation. Words that often
               occur with each other form a topic. In this context, a topic is merely a distribution
               of word frequencies. 
            
               Graphical representation of the LDA model. The plate notation visualizes the
                  generative process of a probabilistic model by following the directions of the
                  arrows. Given 
                     α
                   and 
                     η
                  , one initially draws 
                     β
                  , a distribution over words for each topic and 
                     θ
                  , a topic distribution for each document. Then, for each token within a
                  document, one draws a topic assignment and only then (because 
                     w
                   has input arrows from both, 
                     β
                   and 
                     z
                  ) one can draw 
                     w
                   from the topic in 
                     β
                  , that was assigned in 
                     z
                  .
               
            

            In Figure 3, the LDA model is shown in plate notation.
               An overview over the used symbols is given in the appendix. The plate notation shows
               the graphical representation of the LDA model. An open circle denotes a model
               variable and a shaded circle denotes an observed variable. Symbols without circle
               denote a hyper parameter. A rectangle indicates repetitions of the included
               variables. In this model, 
                  β
                represents the topic histograms, 
                  θ
                represents the topic mixture for each document, z represents the topic
               assignment for each token position and w denotes the token itself. LDA has no notion
               of the order of words within a document, which is referred to in the literature as a
                  bag-of-words for each document. 
            There exists a wide range of topic models that customize LDA by taking into account
               additional structural information. To replace the bag-of-words approach by
               introducing structural information about the word order is a major field of LDA
               research 
               
               . In addition, there is a broad research community that
               addresses the recognition and arrangement of hierarchies of topics 
               . LDA has also been modified to work with
               graph-structured documents . However, we are not aware of
               any literature that shows how to model alteration reasons in a corpus of natural
               language. Therefore, this paper is an important contribution to close this gap, i.e.
               to provide the literary scholarly community with a novel method and to open up
               another field of application for the machine learning community. 
         

            Alteration Latent Dirichlet Allocation
            In Figure 4, the alterLDA model is described in plate
               notation. The upper part is standard LDA whereas the lower right part contains the
               newly introduced variables to model alterations.
            In standard LDA, the observed variable (the input) is just the words within each
               document. In the alterLDA setting, the additional structural information about the
               alteration of each word is provided as input. With that, the alterLDA model tries to
               infer the tendency for each topic to be an alteration topic.
            
               Plate notation of the new alterLDA generative model. Newly introduced is the
                  lower branch with variables 
                     c
                  , 
                     γ
                  , and 
                     ξ
                   that deal with alterations. There exist 
                     M
                   documents with 
                     
                        N
                        m
                     
                   tokens each, Also, there exist 
                     K
                   topics and for each topic, there exist a tendency for it to be a
                  reason for alteration (
                     γ
                  ).
               
            
            The generative model detects reasons by taking into account all text, inside and
               outside the alterations. From alterations that were gone through manually, we expect
               to see alteration suggestions that mainly relate to the privacy of a person,
               political or religious topics may appear as well. In order to make the model
               description as clear as possible, we try to keep the mathematical formulations to a
               minimum. Therefore, we only include an explanation of the symbols used (see
               appendix), a graphical representation and the derivation of how the model can be
               algorithmically captured using a Collapsed Gibbs Sampler. Similar to LDA, in alterLDA
               there exists no feasible algorithm to compute the posterior distribution of the
               latent variables. Instead, approximate methods need to be applied to find a solution
               in reasonable time. 
            A Collapsed Gibbs Sampler is one of the possible approaches to find an approximate
               solution to the objective. Generally, a Gibbs Sampler iteratively samples the
               configuration of a specific latent variable based on the current configuration of all
               other model variables. An introductory tutorial on Gibbs Sampling LDA is presented by
                  . This algorithm can also be understood as an
               instance of a Markov Chain, a constrained iterative probabilistic model itself, where
               the current state only depends on the previous. From this perspective, the stationary
               of the Markov Chain represents the solution of the Gibbs Sampler. The source code of
               our implementation of the Collapsed Gibbs Sampler for the alterLDA model is publicly
                     available.gitlab.tubit.tu-berlin.de/david.lassner/shipping_alterLDA In the
               appendix, derivation of the Collapsed Gibbs Sampler for the alterLDA model is
               given.
         

            Results
            In this section, we present three experiment settings which mainly differ in the
               splitting between training and test data. As shown in Figure
                  5, three settings are chosen, S1 as a straightforward explorative
               demonstration, S3 to comply with the methodological standards of data splitting for
               the performance report, as well as S2 for offering additional explorative results
               specific for this data set. We will first present the evaluation results that
               investigate the performance of alterLDA on the given data set and afterwards present
               explorative results that will be reconciled with expert knowledge. Apart from these
               experiments on the BI data set, the first experiments were performed on synthetic
               data, some results from these experiments are listed in the appendix.
         

            Visualization of the data splitting setup for all settings. For each experiment a
               different data setting is used. The different Settings are shown in the leftmost
               column (S1, S2, S3). Within each setting, the row at the bottom depicts the final
               setting of the data. Setting 1 (only one row) does not require test sets, Setting 2
               (only one row) aims at finding alteration candidates in texts with no alterations.
               For Setting 3, the process of creating the setting is depicted in multiple rows.
               First, only documents that contain alterations are chosen. Then, each individual
               document is shuffled and split into a training and a test part.
            
         

            Performance Evaluation
            In this experiment, in which alterLDA is applied to the entire training data, it is
               to be determined whether the model in principle delivers plausible results. It will
               be verified whether 
                  γ
                finds a meaningful topic composition that represents sensitive topics.
               This means that alteration topics may be a convolution of private and maybe political
               and religious matters.
            With alterLDA, various parameters must be set which influence the outcome. These are
               the same parameters as for LDA: Number of topics and the Dirichlet prior for the
               topic distribution 
                  η
                and the topic mixture 
                  α
               . There is also another parameter, the Dirichlet prior for the alteration
               tendency 
                  ξ
               . The default value for a Dirichlet prior is 1, but it can take any value
               greater than 0. The smaller the value, the more the variable tends to be focussed on
               single values, the larger the value, the more different values are considered. Using
               the topic mixture as an example, a small 
                  α
                would mean that LDA is looking for a solution where each document
               consists of only a few topics, a large 
                  α
                finds a solution with mixtures of many topics. AlterLDA is initialized in
               this setting with 
                  α
                = (.1, .1, …), 
                  η
                = (.1, .1, …) and 
                  ξ
                = (.05, .05, …) as well as K=10. We choose 
                  ξ
                small in this setting to create a sparse 
                  γ
                so that alterLDA only learns one alteration topic. 
            The resulting topic learned in this naive approach as alteration-sensitive is
               visualized as a word cloud in Figure 6. It is very
               difficult to put a single label on this topic. The most probable words are
               strongly influenced by global word frequencies, the strongest four words describe it:
                  Sie Ich Brief schreiben. This does not come as a surprise since the corpus
               consists mainly of letters. However, it is also possible to find terms from any
               subject area that was suspected in advance of being altered: Sickness
               terms are for example Operation,
               Bett,
               fürchten,
               Financial terms are e.g. Geschäft,
               Geld and regarding Love Story there is for example lieb
               and schön.
            Beforehand, we assumed to also find political, religious topics but these do not
               appear in the naive setting whereas diverse private topics do occur.
            
               The strongest words of the topic that has a high alteration tendency after
                  training alterLDA in the naive setting (Setting 1). The stronger the word, the
                  larger the font. Strongest words are very general words on the topic of letters,
                  words from the Financial, Sickness and Love Story are also weakly present.
               
            
            As visualized in Figure 5, the BI corpus consists of
               documents with alterations and documents without alterations. If we want to measure
               the performance of alterLDA in predicting the tendency for alteration, documents with
               alterations are much more helpful.
            In Setting 3, we only use documents with alterations to produce the training and test
               set. We split every document individually into training and test set after shuffling
               to increase the chance that alterations are present in both sets . After training, we use the topic mixture 
                  θ
                of the corresponding document.
            In this setting, alterLDA is initialized with 
                  α
                = (1, 1, …), 
                  η
                = (1, 1, …) and 
                  ξ
                = (1, 1, …) as well as 
                  K
                = 20. We explicitly chose the Dirichlet priors all equal to 1 as this can
               be considered the default. To allow for more topic diversity, we chose the number of
               topics a little bit higher than in the naive setting. This parameter combination will
               be used throughout the rest of the paper.
            The performances on the total test set as well as for each individual author are
               shown in Table 1. The performance varies considerably
               across different authors where D. Tieck, L. Tieck and Ad. Chamisso work well above
               chance level, the performance for Hoffmann and especially H. Finckenstein is weaker.
               In case of H. Finckenstein, this may be due to the fact that in the corpus there is
               only a single letter. For E.T.A. Hoffmann, there is also only one document in the
               corpus, but it presents two specialties. It is considerably longer than most
               documents in the corpus: it is not a letter, but the novella Der
                  Sandmann. The larger size and the differing properties due to the genre
               seem to trade off to a slightly better performance than in the case of H.
               Finckenstein. We thus argue that the performance of alterLDA depends on the size of
               the training set and on the homogeneity of the documents.
            The results of this setting are not meant produce new domain insights as it only aims
               at reproducing the alteration tendencies of already altered documents. However,
               screening performance difference across viewpoints such as authors still
               reveals properties of the underlying data set.
            
               Test set performance for documents with alterations. The test set is grouped by
                  author and two performance measures are given. Balanced Accuracy and Area under
                  Receiver Operating Characteristic. In both cases, the sklearn implementation is
                  used. http://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/classes.html#sklearn-metrics-metrics
                     version 0.20.0.
               
                   Grouping 
                   Balanced Accuracy 
                   Area under ROC 
               
               
                  
                     Adelbert von Chamisso
                  
                  .60 
                  .57 
               
               
                  
                     Henriette v. Finckenstein
                  
                  .38 
                   .07 
               
               
                  
                     Immanuel v. Fichte
                  
                  .49 
                  .64 
               
               
                  
                     E.T.A. Hoffmann
                  
                   .5 
                   .53 
               
               
                  
                     Dorothea Tieck
                  
                   .61 
                   .65 
               
               
                  
                     Ludwig Tieck
                  
                  .69 
                   .65 
               
               
                  
                     Total
                  
                  
                     .67
                  
                  
                     .66
                  
               
            
         

            Explorative Analysis
            In the explorative experiment (S2), the corpus is divided into two parts: On the one
               hand, all documents that contain changes and, on the other hand, all documents that
               do not contain any changes. The aim of the experiment is to train the model on the
               part of the corpus that contains changes and then let the model suggest which parts
               of the unchanged corpus may be changed in a similar way. There may be different
               reasons why some documents contain alterations and others do not. Assuming that all
               documents were reviewed by the same person and that person was also so diligent that
               he or she did not overlook a single passage, then alterLDA should at best-case
               scenario not propose an additional passage to be altered. We assume in this
               experiment that either not all documents have been reviewed for the same criteria or
               that relevant positions have been overlooked.
            
               The table shows the number of suggested alterations for different
                  authors/editors. Only documents that were not truly altered are included. The
                  number of suggested alterations represents the number of positions in documents
                  that the method suggests to alter. Euler and Buch mainly wrote in French, which
                  influenced the prediction a lot for these authors. Chamisso wrote in German
                  although his mother tongue is French. Therefore there may be many minor mistakes
                  that are suggested to be altered. Dorothea Tieck wrote about her mother's sickness
                  which the method recognized as a sensible topic and therefore as a reason for
                  alteration.
               
                   Author 
                   Suggested alterations 
               
               
                  
                     Immanuel Hermann von Fichte
                  
                  3
               
               
                  
                     Karl August Varnhagen von Ense
                  
                  16
               
               
                  
                     Friedrich Wilhelm Neumann
                  
                  54
               
               
                  
                     Helmina von Chézy
                  
                  59
               
               
                  
                     Adelheid Reinbold
                  
                  73
               
               
                  
                     Henriette Herz
                  
                  76
               
               
                  
                     Friedrich von Schuckmann
                  
                  118
               
               
                  
                     Antonie von Chamisso
                  
                  258
               
               
                  
                     Friedrich Wilken
                  
                  340
               
               
                  
                     Ludwig Tieck
                  
                  389
               
               
                  
                     August Boeckh
                  
                  540
               
               
                  
                     Adolf Friedrich von Buch
                  
                  907
               
               
                  
                     Dorothea Tieck
                  
                  929
               
               
                  
                     Adelbert von Chamisso
                  
                  1075
               
               
                  
                     Jean Albert Euler
                  
                  2558
               
            
            In Table 2 the counts of the positions in documents with
               no alterations that have been suggested by the method are displayed for each
               author/editor. The rows in the table are sorted by the total amount of suggested
               alterations. Interestingly, the authors with many suggested alterations are not
               necessarily the ones that have a large share of total tokens of the corpus (see Figure 1, (b) and (c)). In the case of Euler and von
               Buch, this is due to the fact that their documents are mostly in French, whereas the
               alterLDA model in this case is primarily trained on German texts. For Boeckh, this is
               mainly due to the fact that the corpus encompasses only a few yet long documents and
               consequently there are not many documents present in the test set. Of course, there
               are other reasons for each author's ratio of corpus portion and number of suggested
               alterations. A person that altered all positions in the training set also diligently
               edited all documents in the test set and simply did not find any position that should
               be altered for the same reason: That the method did not find the respective amount in
               the test set can either mean that it was not able to find the right positions or that
               there were none.
            For further analysis, we will ignore the texts by J. A. Euler and A. F. Buch and
               focus on the other four authors for which alterLDA suggested most alterations. As
               said, the texts by J. A. Euler and A. F. Buch were mainly written in French which
               influenced the number of suggested alterations. In Table
                  3, the most common words that were suggested to be altered for individual
               authors are listed. For all authors except A. Boeckh, the majority of words seem to
               relate to the overall letter topic, however for D. Tieck the keyword
                  Krankheit
               Sickness appears. For Ad. Chamisso, words like e.g. schön and
                  begehren can be observed that may relate to the topic Love
                  Story. In the case of L. Tieck, a distinct convoluted alteration topic is
               not immediately conceivable. In the case of A. Boeckh, the topic of the documents in
               the corpus are mostly academia-related.
            
               Most common words that were suggested to be altered in texts from individual
                  authors.
               
                   Author 
                   25 most common suggested alteration words (descending order)
                  
               
               
                  
                     Dorothea Tieck
                  
                  Sie, Brief, schreiben, Ich, schön, gewiß, denken, einig, lesen, all,
                     gleichen, Düsseldorf, Agnes, Krankheit, Freund, kennen, erhalten, Arbeit,
                     Dresden, halten, weiß, Die, Leben, Berlin, Lüttichau
               
               
                  
                     Adelbert v. Chamisso
                  
                  Brief, schreiben, Ich, de, Die, weiß, kennen, all, wissen, schön, 4, Freund,
                     denken, Sie, gleichen, halten, 3, neu, ton, erhalten, begehren, bleiben, einig,
                     lesen, Sache
               
               
                  
                     Ludwig Tieck
                  
                  Sie, Freund, Ich, Geist, Brief, Tieck, Dresden, Von, Ihr, umarmen, Juli,
                     halten, sogleich, erleben, Die, schwach, schweigen, sprechen, Mich, Herrn,
                     Vergnügen, fordern, Masse, gleichen, eintreten
               
               
                  
                     August Boeck
                  
                  Mitglied, Seminar, Sie, Prämie, Fichte, erhalten, Arbeit, 1813, 2,
                     Verfasser, 1812, Übung, hiesig, 4, Fähigkeit, welch, außerordentlich, Nummer,
                     zahlen, Prüfung, Wernike, Anstalt, anfangen, Gedicht, Studiosus
               
            
            For a better understanding of alteration suggestions, a closer look into the
               individual authors is provided. D. Tieck’s documents reveal a sequence of letters
               that she wrote to F. Uechtritz in the years between 1831 and 1840. In the letters she
               repeatedly mentions her mother’s sickness until her death in February 1837. Later, in
               March 1837, the father of F. Uechtritz passed away as well, D. Tieck writes about
               this in Letter 28. 
            By manually reviewing this series of letters, the editors of the BI edition agreed in
               many cases with the classification of the alterLDA model that the sickness of D.
               Tieck’s mother plays a role for the alteration tendencies of the documents. In some
               cases, however, human experts and the model disagreed about the reason for
               alteration. The following excerpt from letter 12 is identified by our proposed method
               as a stylistic alteration. Meine arme Mutter leidet schon seit längerer Zeit an Unter=
                     leibsbeschwerden, der Arzt sagt es seyen
                     Verhärtungen und Anschwellungen der Drü=
                     sen, sie hat schon seit längerer Zeit viel zu leiden, braucht schon
                     seit 3 Monathen, trinkt seit 4 Wochen hier
                     Karlsbad, und alles bis jetzt ohne den
                     mindesten Erfolg.
                  (BI, Dorothea Tieck to v.
                     Uechtritz, Letter 12, p. 2) And one can argue that this is actually
               a stylistic alteration, because the information about the mother’s sickness is
               preserved after the alteration. However, the detail that her mother has pelvic
               complaints is suppressed in the second version - this discrepancy in detail can be
               decisive for classification as a content-related alteration.
            In Figure 7, the number of suggested alterations (for
               the test set) and the number of actual alterations (for the training set) are
               displayed for each document by Ad. Chamisso. Most of the letters are addressed to L.
               de La Foye (Ad. Chamisso’s best friend), some are addressed to Antonie von Chamisso
               (Ad. Chamisso’s wife). For each of the addressees, the letters are ordered by date.
               There are two letters (letter 10 and 11) which stand out significantly with regard to
               the number of alterations, letter 10 actually encompasses a large number of
               alterations, whereas letter 11 is part of the test set and thus does not have any
               (content-related) alterations. The alterLDA model suggests an almost equally high
               number of alterations for letter 11, presumably because it consists of topics that
               the alterLDA model estimates to be altered accordingly - this shows that the alterLDA
               model captures subtle changes of topics by the same author.
            
               The letters are divided into documents containing content-related alterations
                  (white background) and documents without content-related alterations (purple
                  background). The alterLDA model is trained on the white part and predicts possible
                  alterations on the purple part, so the blue line shows the number of real
                  alterations and suggested alterations, depending on the background. Left of the
                  dotted separator, we find letters addressed to L. de La Foye, on the right side
                  letters addressed to An. Chamisso. There are two consecutive outliers with
                  significantly higher numbers of alteration words. One is part of the training set,
                  one is part of the test set, the temporal proximity may indicate a content-related
                  proximity that the model was able to capture.
               
            
            In Figure 8, the correspondence from L. Tieck to F.
               Raumer that is depicted ranges from years 1815 to 1840. The left panel showing the
               number of letters that were sent during that year grouped by whether they contain
               content-related alterations. The right panel shows the number of tokens that were
               altered (blue) and the number of tokens that alterLDA suggests to be altered
               (orange). 
            Just comparing the blue bars of the two panels reveals that despite the fact that in
               1836 there was only one letter written, there occurs the third-highest number of
               altered tokens. By examining the letter, it turns out that Tieck wrote about his
               financial problems and his plans to sell his book collection to the Count Yorck von
                     Wartenburg.[..] Tieck plante aus finanzieller
                     Bedrängnis heraus den Verkauf seiner Bibliothek an den Grafen Yorck von
                     Wartenburg[..]
                  BI, comment by Johanna Preusse in letter from Ludwig
                  Tieck to Friedrich von Raumer (Dresden, 11. November 1836)
            
            Referring back to Table 3, Financial terms are not
               present in the most common alteration suggestions for L. Tieck. This could indicate
               that the person editing L. Tieck’s letters did not miss parts that refer to this
               financial struggle.
            When also considering the suggestions by alterLDA (the orange bars of the panel on
               the right), one letter from 1838 draws the most attention just by the sheer number of
               suggested alterations. In this letter, L. Tieck refers to disputes between the
               Catholic Church and the Prussian state at that time.Kontext der von Tieck angedeuteten Vorgänge waren Machtstreitigkeiten zwischen
                     der katholischen Kirche und dem preußischen Staat. [..]
                  BI, comment by Johanna Preusse in letter from Ludwig
                  Tieck to Friedrich von Raumer (Dresden, 27. März 1838) By arguing about
               this political controversy, L. Tieck chooses his wording in such a way that alterLDA
               suggests alterations. This could indicate that across the training corpus there might
               be the same tendency to alter parts of the documents that deal with a political
               controversy. The fact that alterLDA highlights a document containing a mixture of
               political and religious topics supports the hypothesis that the alterations in the BI
               corpus do not only consist of privacy matters, but also involve a wider political
               dimension. This result confirms and gives a novel dimension to the assertion that
               letters as a text genre evolve, especially in the German context of the 1800s, at the
               interface between private and public matters. In that sense, the role played by
               alterations aiming at balancing private and public dimensions is central and needs to
               be further delved into. AlterLDA provides a systematic approach to this major issue
               in literary studies.
            
               Left panel shows the timeline with counts of letters from Ludwig Tieck to
                  Friedrich von Raumer. The right panel shows the number of tokens that were altered
                  (blue) and the number of suggested tokens (orange). The comparison between the
                  number of letters and the number of alterations for each year shows that there are
                  times where the letters were altered more (e.g. 1836). The letters with suggested
                  alterations deal with financial, political and religuous topics.
               
            
         

            Conclusion
            This paper presented a general framework for analyzing alterations in historical
               documents, ranging from simple error corrections to stylistic changes and even to
               content-related alterations. In addition to established methods such as regular
               expressions, string distances and vector space comparison, a new probabilistic model
               for the classification of reasons for alterations has been introduced (alterLDA). 
            This work contributes to the understanding of text genesis, as it provides insight
               into the layers of changes in documents. It also offers a quantitative way of
               evaluating which topics are at what times prone to be altered and are therefore
               sensitive. 
            From a machine learning point of view, the BI data set posed special challenges
               because, on the one hand, the data set is very small and, on the other hand, it
               comprises several languages, which also differ greatly from the ones used today.
               Nonetheless, alterLDA was able to confidently find alterations on unseen, labelled
               data. Exploratively, the method was able to find characteristics on unseen, unlabeled
               data that in many cases match the expert analysis. The method hence proves to be
               useful to draw the human reader's attention to specific parts of the large corpus
               that may otherwise be unnoticed, and by doing so serves as an example of how a
               machine learning method may assist a scholar as a collaborating reader and a
               potential collaborating editor. 
            With regard to the editorial issues first presented here, it is to be noted that the
               machine-readability of the BI edition makes it possible to serve problem-specific,
               individualised editions tailored to the research question of a reader/scholar. This
               project showcases how machine learning methods radically transform the way in which
               scholars engage historical documents, by taking advantage of the quality of
               deeply-annotated data: editorial and machine learning expertise can be brought
               together to explore in depth Humanities research questions.
            This research benefited greatly from expert knowledge on the corpus as well as from
               novel ML methods that were designed for this corpus. This collaboration therefore
               presents important guidelines for practical and methodological steps that will help
               other projects to enrich their digital editions with automated annotation or
               ML-guided corpus exploration.
            To achieve further progress, highly interdisciplinary research is mandatory where
               novel ML models are conceived, and domain knowledge from literary studies is
               interacting with statistical inference. 
         

            Appendix
            
               Non-content-related Alteration Processing
               To identify the non-content-related alteration categories, existing methods are
                  used, however, for the identification of the specific content related reasons on
                  the right, the novel alterLDA method is used. As the main contribution of this
                  work lays in introducing the new alterLDA model, the description of the
                  non-content-related alterations. In this section, the description of the
                  established methods is shortly summarized, whereas the description of alterLDA is
                  given more space in the forthcoming subsections.

               
                  Paratexts
                  In Figure 2, the excerpt of the facsimile marked
                     as archival note (orange) has the number 6 written in the top right corner of
                     the sheet, this detail is shown in Figure 9. The
                     corresponding xml transcription is the following: <note type="foliation" place="margin-right inline"
      hand="#pencil_1">6</note> As the header reveals, this pencil
                     numbering has been performed by an archivist:
		     <handNote xml:id="pencil_1" scope="minor"
          medium="pencil" scribe="archivist">
  <seg xml:xml:lang="de">Hand eines Archivars,
                         in Bleistift.</seg>
  <seg xml:xml:lang="en">Hand of an archivist,
                         in pencil.</seg>
  <seg xml:xml:lang="fr">Main d'un archiviste,
                         crayon de papier.</seg>
 </handNote>

		     For the second pencil note in Figure 9
                     there is no scribe annotated although it also contains nothing but a numbering:
                        <note type="foliation" place="align(center)"
      hand="#pencil_2">
  <hi rend="underline">99</hi>
</note>
			The additions that have been performed by a
			different hand than the primary author and
			that contain numberings or dates, we consider
			to be archivists notes. Such archivist’s or
			editor’s additions can be identified with a
			very basic set of rules.

                  
                     Archival note. BI, Adelbert von Chamisso to Louis de La Foye. Nachlass
                        239, Blatt 6. Staatsbibliothek Berlin / Manuscripts section. Reuse subject
                        to prior approval by Staatsbibliothek Berlin. Published in: Letter from
                        Adelbert von Chamisso to Louis de La Foye (fragment) (without place, 26 june
                        1804). Ed. by Anna Busch, Sabine Seifert. Prepared by Janine Katins. In
                        collaboration with Sabine Seifert, Sophia Zeil. In: Letters and texts: Intellectual Berlin around 1800. Ed. by Anne
                        Baillot. Berlin: Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin. http://www.berliner-intellektuelle.eu/manuscript?Brief005ChamissoandeLaFoye.
                        Last modified: 27 April 2015. 
                     
                  
               
               
                  Corrections
                  
                     Correction of mistake of wurde to würde. BI, Adelbert von
                        Chamisso to Louis de La Foye. Nachlass 239, Blatt 85. Staatsbibliothek
                        Berlin / Manuscripts section. Reuse subject to prior approval by
                        Staatsbibliothek Berlin. Published in: Letter from
                           Adelbert von Chamisso to Louis de La Foye (Geneva, at the
                        beginning of 1812). Ed. by Anna Busch, Sabine Seifert. Prepared by Lena
                        Ebert. In: Letters and texts: Intellectual Berlin
                           around 1800. Ed. by Anne Baillot. Berlin: Humboldt-Universität zu
                        Berlin. http://www.berliner-intellektuelle.eu/manuscript?Brief047ChamissoandeLaFoye.
                        Last modified: 27 April 2015.
                     
                  
                  The alteration marked in green replaces a single character of a word, for which
                     the corresponding part of the facsimile is shown in Figure 10.
[..]Geschichte wuürde lang
und schal ausfallen[..]
BI, Adelbert von Chamisso to Louis de La Foye. Letter 47, p. 1 This alteration is a correction of
                     a mistake and conceptually, it is worth noting that the words before and after
                     the alteration are very similar. This characteristic will be exploited for the
                     identification of corrections. Identifying corrections is a considerably more
                     difficult task because the corrected version does not necessarily have to be
                     correct from what we know today. The fact that the alteration author corrected
                     the text only means that he or she thought that his or her version is correct.
                     We thus cannot rely on comparing the second version of the text with what an
                     automatic spell checker would the first version correct to. Instead, we divided
                     the problem even further into spelling alterations and grammatical alterations.
                     For identifying spelling mistakes, the tokens of both versions are fuzzy-string
                     matched against the common dictionary of lemmas. If both tokens match closely
                     to the same lemma according to the Levenshtein distance, the two tokens are
                     considered two different spellings of the same word. Fuzzy string matching of
                     multiple tokens against a large vocabulary can be costly in terms of computing
                     time and memory. For a larger data set an adjustment to this approach may be
                     necessary. However, this approach gave better results than simply comparing
                     Levenshtein distance of the tokens of both versions with each other, due to
                     smaller tokens that are very similar but mean different things (e.g.
                        hate and fate have Levenshtein distance of 1 but have a very
                     different meaning.) For identifying grammatical alterations, we assume that the
                     forms of the tokens in the sentence change and probably punctuations are added
                     or deleted, but the set of lemmas is preserved for the most part. Hence, if the
                     forms or the part of speech of the tokens in the span change but the set of
                     lemmas do not, this alteration is a grammatical correction.
               
               
                  Stylistic Alterations
                  
[..] DaherEs bedarf esdaher hier eines [..]
BI, About the notion of philosophy PP. by Immanuel Hermann von Fichte, p. 14
                  For identifying stylistic alterations, we assume that all corrections and
                     paratexts are already labelled according to the described method. Thus, there
                     are only stylistic alterations and moral censorships left to be labelled. In
                     our understanding, a stylistic alteration preserves the meaning of the text by
                     only changing the way it is posed which includes rearranging of words, the use
                     of synonyms and rephrasing. In recent years, a method gained a lot of attention
                     that strives to find a vector-space representation of words that capture its
                     meaning. Words or sentences projected to this space reveal a high similarity
                     (for example cosine-similarity) if they have the same meaning. We introduce a
                     threshold and consider all alterations for which the vector-space embedding of
                     the text before and after the alteration reveal a smaller distance to be a
                     stylistic alteration.
                  The alteration marked in blue (Figure 2) which is
                     shown in higher resolution in Figure 11, reorders
                     the words at the beginning of a sentence without changing the meaning.
                  
                     Stylistic alteration of Daher bedarf es to Es bedarf daher.
                        BI, About the notion of philosophy PP. by Immanuel Hermann von Fichte, p.
                        14
                     
                  
                  For completeness, we also provide the individual facsimile of the content
                     related alteration example in Figure 12.
                  
                     Content-related alteration. Nachlass Uechtritz. Oberlausitzische
                        Bibliothek der Wissenschaften Görlitz. Reuse subject to prior approval by
                        Oberlausitzische Bibliothek der Wissenschaften Görlitz. Letter from Dorothea
                        Tieck to Friedrich von Uechtritz (Dresden, 10 April 1835). Ed. by Sophia
                        Zeil. Published in: Letters and texts: Intellectual
                           Berlin around 1800. Ed. by Anne Baillot. Berlin:
                        Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin. http://www.berliner-intellektuelle.eu/manuscript?Brief16DorotheaTieckanUechtritz.
                        Last modified: 24 January 2015.
                     
                  
                  
                     Used Symbols
                     
                        Identifier
                        Meaning
                        Type
                        Dimensionality
                     
                     
                        V
                        Number of unique tokens in the dictionary
                        Int
                        
                     
                     
                        W
                        Number of tokens in the corpus
                        Int
                        
                     
                     
                        M
                        Number of documents
                        Int
                        
                     
                     
                        Nm
                        Number of tokens in document m
                        Int
                        
                     
                     
                        K
                        Number of topics
                        Int
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              α
                           
                        
                        Concentration of 
                              θ
                           
                        
                        Hyper parameter
                        K
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              η
                           
                        
                        Concentration of 
                              β
                           
                        
                        Hyper parameter
                        V
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              ξ
                           
                        
                        Concentration of 
                              γ
                           
                        
                        Hyper parameter
                        2
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              β
                           
                        
                        Topic-term variable
                        Dirichlet
                        K x V
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              θ
                           
                        
                        Document-topic variable
                        Dirichlet
                        M x K
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              γ
                           
                        
                        Topic-alteration-tendency variable
                        Dirichlet
                        K x 2
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              z
                           
                        
                        Token-topic variable
                        Categorical
                        W x K
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              w
                           
                        
                        Tokens 
                        Observed (Categorical)
                        W x V
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              c
                           
                        
                        Alteration
                        Observed (Categorical)
                        W X 2
                     
                  
               
               
                  Collapsed Gibbs Sampler of the AlterLDA Model
                  For the Collapsed Gibbs Sampler of the alterLDA model it is shown how to derive
                     the posterior for the topic assignment at a current position, given the current
                     configuration. First, the joint probability of the whole model is given before
                     showing how to compute the topic assignment based on count statistics.The joint
                     probability of the model is given by $$\begin{align*} p(\mathbf{w}, c, z, \gamma, \beta, \theta~|~\alpha,\eta,
                        \xi) =& p(c~|~z) \cdot p(\mathbf{w}~|~z,\beta) \cdot p(\gamma~|~\xi)
                        \cdot p(\beta~|~\eta)\cdot p(z~|~\theta)\cdot p(\theta~|~\alpha)\\ =&
                        \prod^{M,N}\text{cat}(c~|~c,\gamma) \times
                        \prod^{M,N}\text{cat}(\textbf{w}~|~z,\beta)\times\prod^{M,N}\text{cat}(z~|~\theta)\\
                        &\times\prod^{M}\text{dir}(\theta~|~\alpha)\times\prod^{K}\text{dir}(\gamma~|~\xi)\times\prod^{K}\text{dir}(\beta~|~\eta)\\
                        \end{align*}$$
                   We introduce a counter variable 
                        c
                      which can be indexed in four dimensions, the current topic (
                        k
                     ), the current document (
                        m
                     ), the current alteration mode (
                        a
                     ) and the current token (
                        w
                     ). $$ c_{k,m,a,\mathbf{w}} =
                        \sum_{n=1}^N \mathbf{I}( z_{m,n}=k \quad\&\quad w_{m,n} = \mathbf{w}
                        \quad\&\quad c_{m,n} = a ) $$
                  
                  In this setting, the desired computation is the probability of a topic
                     assignment at a specific position given a current configuration of all other
                     topic assignments. This probability can be formalized by $$\begin{align*}
                        p(z_{m,n}~|~z_{-_{(m,n)}},\mathbf{w},c,\alpha,\eta,\xi)&\propto~p(z_{m,n},z_{-_{(m,n)}},\mathbf{w},c~|~\alpha,\eta,\xi)
                        \end{align*}$$
                   Adopting Equation 16 from the Carpenter paper, this probability can be written
                     by marginalizing 
                        θ
                     , 
                        β
                      and 
                        γ
                      from the joint probability. $$\begin{align*} p(z_{m,n},z_{-_{(m,n)}},\mathbf{w},c~|~\alpha,\eta,\xi) =
                        & \int\int\int~p(\mathbf{w},c,z,\gamma,\beta,
                        \theta~|~\alpha,\eta,\xi)d\theta~d\beta~d\gamma\\ = &
                        \underbrace{\int~p(\theta~|~\alpha)\cdot~p(z~|~\theta)d\theta}_A\\ &
                        \times
                        \underbrace{\int~p(\mathbf{w}~|~z,\beta)\cdot~p(\beta~|~\eta)d\beta}_B\\
                        & \times \int~p(c~|~z,\gamma)\cdot~p(\gamma~|~\xi)d\gamma\\ = &
                        \prod_{k=1}^K\int~p(\gamma_k~|~\xi)\prod_{m=1,n=1}^{M,N_m}p(c~|~\gamma_{\text{argmax}(z_{m,n})})d\gamma_k
                        \times A \times B \end{align*}$$
                   A and B are substituted here because their derivation is identical to the one
                     in Carpenter et al. Analogue to Equation 27 of Carpenter et al., after
                     inserting the definitions of the Dirichlet distribution the result is
                     proportional to three factors. $$\begin{align*} \propto
                        (\mathbf{c}^-_{z_{m,n},*,*,*}+\alpha_{z_{m,n}})\left( \frac{
                        \mathbf{c}^-_{z_{m,n},*,*,\mathbf{w}_{m,n}}+\eta_{w_{m,n}} }{
                        \mathbf{c}^-_{z_{m,n},*,*,*}+\sum_v^V\eta_{v} } \right)\left( \frac{
                        \mathbf{c}^-_{z_{m,n},*,c_{m,n},*}+\xi_{w_{m,n}} }{
                        \mathbf{c}^-_{z_{m,n},*,*,*}+\sum_i^2\xi_{i} } \right)
                        \end{align*}$$ where 
                        
                           
                              ⋅
                           
                           
                              -
                           
                        
                      denotes the counter disregarding the current position 
                        m
                        ,
                        n
                     .
               
               
                  Results on Synthetic Data
                  A big advantage of generative models is that they can be used to generate new
                     data. The generated documents themselves may not be too interesting in the case
                     of topic models, but they can be used to evaluate the functionality of the
                     model. To do this, first, the variables of the model are initialized, and
                     documents are generated. Now the variables are initialized again and based on
                     the previously generated documents the old variable configurations are
                     reconstructed. The performance of the inference can be measured by the accuracy
                     of the reconstruction. 
                  In Figure 13, the results of such an
                     evaluation over 324 different experiment runs is shown, within the sparsity of
                     the hyper-parameters as well as the number of tokens were varied. Each cell
                     shows the mean reconstruction of c over two runs with a given set of parameter
                     choices. The brighter the color of the cell, the better the reconstruction.
                     Overall, a smaller alpha yields better results, independent of the size of the
                     data set and the choice of the other concentration factors. Interestingly, for
                     fewer documents and 
                        α
                        =
                        0.1
                        ,
                      a smaller concentration factor 
                        η
                      performs better, wheras for either a larger number of documents or
                     a larger 
                        α
                        =
                        1.0
                        ,
                     a larger 
                        η
                      is to be preferred. The explanation for this result is that with
                     more documents, the exact proportions of the topics can be inferred more
                     accurately, wheras for fewer documents, there is the chance of getting a few
                     (sparse) topics right.
                  
                     Grid search result for training accuracy of 
                           
                              
                                 c
                              
                              
                                 ^
                              
                           
                         parameter on synthetic data. Even with a small total number of
                        tokens, the accuracy can be very high. Interestingly, the accuracy depends
                        strongly on the sparsity of 
                           α
                        , 
                           ξ
                        , and 
                           η
                        .
                     
                  
               
            
         
