Title:  Automated Transcription of Non-Latin Script
               Periodicals: A Case Study in the Ottoman Turkish Print Archive
Volume:  016
Issue:  2
Date:  21 April 2022
Abstract:  
            
            Our study discusses the automated transcription with deep learning methods of a
               digital newspaper collection printed in a historical language, Arabic-script Ottoman
               Turkish (OT), dating to the late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century. We situate
               OT text collections within a larger history of digitization of periodicals,
               underscoring special challenges faced by Arabic script languages. Our paper approaches the question of automated transcription of non-Latin script languages, such
               as OT, from the broader perspective of debates surrounding OCR use for historical
               archives. In our study with OT, we have opted for training handwritten text
               recognition (HTR) models that generate transcriptions in the left-to-right, Latin
               writing system familiar to contemporary readers of Turkish, and not, as some scholars
               may expect, in right-to-left Arabic script text. As a one-to-one correspondence
               between the writing systems of OT and modern Turkish does not exist, we also discuss
               approaches to transcription and the creation of ground truth and argue that the
               challenges faced in the training of HTR models also draw into question
               straightforward notions of transcription, especially where divergent writing systems
               are involved. Finally, we reflect on potential domain bias of HTR models in other
               historical languages exhibiting spatio-temporal variance as well as the significance
               of working between writing systems for language communities that also have
               experienced language reform and script change.
         
Full Body Text: 

            Introduction
            Imagine that you are a researcher starting a Ph.D. project or a new book. In addition
               to identifying a topic, conducting a literature review, and fine-tuning your research
               question, you will also need to navigate an extensive archive of millions of documents, large parts of which are yet to be cataloged; some collections have been
               opened to researchers only in recent decades and the digitization of the archive is
               still at its earliest stages, making a keyword searchable corpus unavailable.In
                  a 1960 article, Stanford Show, a leading scholar of Ottoman history, described the
                  challenges of working in Ottoman archives as follows: Months
                     of searching into the catalogs is necessary to locate all available materials
                     concerning each subject, and much longer time is required to gather these
                     materials and mold them into an intelligible unit of study
                  . For a more recent evaluation of the
                  state-of-the-field, which reveals that there has not been any significant
                  improvement in the accessibility of the archive since the 1960s, see Gratien et al. (2014). This situation is the
               reality of historical research in the Ottoman archives at the time of writing this
               article. In addition to the challenges of accessibility of the archive, there is also
               a fundamental question of script literacy; Ottoman Turkish (OT) is written in Arabic
               script that most Turkish speakers today cannot read. To what scholarly apparatus
               would historians of differing skill levels turn for doing their work — annotating and
               transcribing for recall, or simply combing through the most relevant sections of the
               archive — when these documents are printed in a writing system that is foreign to
               their contemporary script habitus? It might seem that we are speaking about a many
               century's old historical situation, but in the case of OT, archival documents created
               as little as one hundred years ago are not accessible to speakers of modern Turkish
               who have not received a specialized education in OT.
            In Istanbul, where the central archive of the Ottoman State and several of the most
               important research libraries in the field of Ottoman studies are located, there is an
               informal market of hireable transcribers to meet the demand for transcription of OT
               historical documents to Latin script modern Turkish. Consisting mainly of students
               and graduates of departments of history and Turkish literature, the informal labor of
               this market offers its services to scholars who do not have the time required to
               transcribe their documents. In the absence of extensive digitization of archives,
               these transcribers also provide on-site research services for their individual
               clients, many of whom do not live, or work regularly, in Istanbul.Such was the
                  experience of one of the authors of this article, a native speaker of Turkish,
                  while conducting her doctoral research on the emergence of a modern public
                  education network for women in the Ottoman Empire. The examination of the
                  undigitized and uncataloged documents of the Ottoman Ministry of Public Education
                  and the relevant Ottoman Turkish periodicals took over a year. She enlisted the
                  help of a transcriber to annotate and transcribe the documents she collected. The
                  hired transcriber also conducted research in the Hakkı Tarık Us Periodicals
                  Collection, which, at the time, had not yet been fully digitized.
            As the digitization of Ottoman-era archives is underway,The two most notable
                  projects in this vein are the digitizations of the Hakkı Tarık Us (HTU) print
                     periodicals repository and the manuscript
                  collections of the Presidential Ottoman State Archives. Even though it has been a
                  decade since the completion of the digitization phase of the project, at present
                  the web interface for the HTU is still in Beta version. Catalogue information
                  about the contents of the collection is meager and search options are
                  non-existent. For a detailed report on the contents and accessibility of the HTU
                  digital repository, see Baykal (2011). Work on the
                  digitization of the central Ottoman archive continues to this day. So far, some 40
                  million documents from the collections of the Ottoman and Republican archives are
                  estimated to have been digitized and made available online. our article concerns one approach to increasing
               searchable (and computational) access to them. We discuss experiments that we carried
               out by automatically transcribing a small amount of the holdings of the larger
               Ottoman archive: two Ottoman Turkish periodical series from the Hakkı Tarık Us (HTU)
               Digital Repository. With some 1,500 periodicals and an estimated number of 400,000
               pages, the HTU online archive is perhaps the most comprehensive digital collection of
               the Ottoman Turkish press from the 1840s to the 1920s. Originally the private library
               of Mr. Hakkı Tarık Us (1889-1956), the digitization (2003-2010) of this collection
               was a collaboration between Beyazıt State Library in Istanbul and Tokyo University of
               Foreign Studies. Despite being online for a little more than a decade, searchability
               of the HTU documents is still unavailable. 
            Whereas some newspaper mass digitization projects in the world were launched under circumstances in which searchability was not a
                  priority
               ,Salmi draws upon the argument made by  which explains that many digitization projects were
                  actually concerned with the remediation of microforms rather than searchable text
                  creation. it is not known to us if this was the case with the HTU corpus or
               whether OCR-based text creation was simply technically impossible at the time, or
               both. In the mid- to late-2000s, the HTU platform digitized images in DjVu format — a
               format that offers a corresponding text layer for each image — the choice of which presumably was to leverage the linguistic skills of literate Ottomanists to transcribe the documents into modern Turkish.We know that it was during roughly
                  the same period of the digitization of the HTU that the Arabic-language plain text
                  corpus known as Al-Maktaba al-Shāmila came into
                  being, probably via manual keying of the texts . Unfortunately, this format was already outdated at the time . Although the file format would have allowed
               for the creation of a text layer for the HTU as early as 2010, the promise of a text
               searchable OT corpus remains to this day an unfulfilled one.It is important to
                  note that one of the most famous European crowd-transcription projects Transcribe
                     Bentham, was not set
                  up until 2012.
            
            You do not need to be an Ottomanist, of course, to confront such a problem with
               unsearchable digitized archives; the same could be said of other digital collections
               in many other world languages: medieval manuscripts, letter collections, miscellanea
               archives. It is important to note that both digitization and OCR are historical
               processes with differing degrees of technical development and variable success rates
               across world languages. In the case of mass digitization of periodicals in the
               nineteenth century US context, we have been encouraged to [take]
                  dirty OCR seriously
               . This is not only because early digitization and OCR
               methods did not produce high quality text and it is unlikely that either process will
               be carried out again, but also because no matter what methods of studying imperfect corpora are devised in the future, understanding the layered histories of
               digitization and text creation remains a key element of digital historical
               inquiry.
            For languages written in Arabic script from right to left, OCR is a complex process
               in which research has made progress, but is yet to become fully efficient .The authors of this article worked with an OCR
                  system (Transkribus) that was developed in the
                  context of an EU-funded research initiative for transcribing historical archives
                  which in recent years has evolved into a scholarly cooperative (READ COOP). Other
                  methods for neural-based automatic transcription have been under development for
                  some time, including Kraken and E-Scripta, which require a significant investment
                  in digital research infrastructure that was not feasible for the authors in the
                  institution to which they belong. As OCR is an algorithmic process in
               computer vision that transforms images of letters and words — by many iterations of
               guessing, ranking, and even human intervention and correction — into digital text,
               the more intervention that is required the more labor-intensive the process of text
               creation becomes. Additionally, the more the features of the language that one works
               with differ from the Latin-based scripts on which OCR was first developed, the more
               development and research into new systems are required. At the time of writing this
               article, however, the situation of historical OCR has already started to change
               radically. This development is mainly thanks to the increased accessibility of
               user-centered neural systems for transcribing handwritten archives, and by extension
               for printed cursive scripts, such as Arabic or Ottoman Turkish, in which it can be
               difficult for a computer to determine where one letter ends and another begins. Some
               of the current generation neural systems’ text recognition abilities go beyond simple
               character recognition, which has been the main challenge OCR faces with handwritten
               texts and cursive scripts such as Arabic — due to the fact that some letters are
               connected to each other — to allow for larger chunks of the text, such as words or
               whole lines, to be recognized as units. In this paper, we adopt one such system for
               automating the transcription of printed OT texts, the platform known as Transkribus, and we argue that not
               only are new approaches to OCR beneficial in opening up historical archives, but also
               that with those approaches comes an evolving role for human effort and new,
               concomitant challenges for working with such machine-created text.

            Our choice to apply handwritten text recognition (HTR) technologies to non-Latin
               script digitized historical periodicals is an intentional one, with the purpose of
               creating a workable access point to Ottoman historical materials. The long term goal
               of our research is to generate general HTR models for text creation from this
               periodicals collection that will facilitate its use in computational research. In
               this article we discuss some of the initial challenges we have faced, as well as some
               of the promising results that we have achieved.
            As interest turns to a multilingual DH, the accessibility of archives and modes of
               participatory text creation, we find the Ottoman Turkish example to be a
               thought-provoking case study since it links problems which the GLAM sector has
               traditionally confronted with other problems not typically found in Western language
               archives: text directionality and script, in particular.
         

            Part 1 - Background & Historical Context
            
               Historical Context
               How we encode Ottoman Turkish (OT), the Arabic-script language of administration
                  and high culture in the Ottoman Empire between the fourteenth and early twentieth
                  centuries, presents a significant challenge for OCR, not only from a computer
                  vision perspective, but also importantly from a linguistic one.As the small
                     Ottoman principality from western Anatolia evolved into a multi-lingual,
                     multi-ethnic empire that came to rule over most of the Middle East and South
                     Eastern Europe the syntax and the writing system of OT grew in their complexity
                     while its vocabulary expanded exponentially. For an evaluation of the
                     development of Ottoman language in its written form, see Darling (2012). While Turkish syntax and
                  vocabulary formed the main framework of the language, OT borrowed extensively from
                  Arabic and Farsi in terms of both loan words and grammatical structures. With the
                  political upheaval that ensued the demise of the Ottoman state and the creation of
                  the Turkish Republic in the wake of WWI, OT was outlawed for public use in 1928
                  and supplanted by a TurkifiedBy Turkified we mean that many of
                     the Arabic and Persian words in the language were removed in favor of words of
                     Turkish origin. For an in depth analysis of Turkish language reform, see Lewis (2002). version of the language
                  written from left to right (LTR) in Latin script .
               It would be incorrect to say, however, that the Ottoman archive was sealed in
                  1928. Physical access to it was possible, although limited , but within a generation or so, the Arabic-script
                  literacy required to use the archives declined. The first generation of historians
                  who had been educated in Republican schools no longer had the linguistic skills of
                  native speakers of OT to carry out research in the archives. Coupled with the
                  ideological choice of the political leadership to shun the Islamic imperial
                  heritage of the newly created nation-state of Turkey, the so-called Turkish
                  language reform created deep gaps in the scholarly infrastructure of the early
                  Republican period, with most serious academic discussions on Ottoman history and
                  language shifting to scholarly circles outside of Turkey.As a case in point,
                     two of the most prominent Turkish Ottomanists of the early Republican era,
                     Kemal Karpat and Halil Inacik, received their higher education and/or worked in
                     Western universities. A sizable portion of both of these scholars’ publications
                     are in English, i.e. their intended audience was Anglophone and not necessarily
                     Turkish. For a further example of a key academic discussion taking place
                     outside of Turkey, see Birnbaum’s 1967 article on the transliteration of OT,
                     where he discusses in detail the indifferent attitude in Turkey toward
                     developing a coherent transcription scheme for OT .
               Alphabet change had deeper cultural implications that went well beyond its
                  ramifications for the scholarly establishment. Today, any Turkish citizen who
                  wants to access their pre-1928 cultural heritage needs either to receive
                  specialized education in Ottoman Turkish or to read the transcribed and edited
                  versions of the select OT texts available in modern Turkish. Reading OT documents
                  and books transcribed into Latin script has become the norm. There is, therefore,
                  a real demand for transcription, a demand that, to this day, has been only
                  partially satisfied by human transcription.To this end, a team of
                     professional transcribers is employed by the Presidential State Archives in
                     Istanbul to transcribe, edit, and publish selections of documents from their
                     vast holdings. These are made available online for free for public use. Turkish publishing houses also
                     commission experts in the field to transcribe and annotate important cultural
                     texts in Ottoman Turkish or to produce adaptations of these in modern Turkish
                     for popular consumption. Furthermore, the language reform has not only
                  created a barrier between one nation and its historical, cultural documentation
                  but also, as OT was the former administrative language of the successor states of
                  the Ottoman Empire, both language and script persist as barriers in accessing this
                  larger imperial heritage by the broader scholarly community.
            
            
               Archives and Access
               For many languages of the world that have not traditionally been represented in
                  the textual digital humanities, in particular historical languages, the obstacles
                  of being at the table are very real.The conversation is not a new
                     one, but recent years have seen growth in scholarly discussion about them.
                     Researchers have recently stressed not only the urgency of access to digital
                     tools but also the inequities of digital material and knowledge infrastructures
                     across languages as a question of access. Notable efforts include a full-day
                     workshop at the 2019 ADHO conference entitled Towards Multilingualism In
                        Digital Humanities: Achievements, Failures And Good Practices In DH Projects
                        With Non-latin Scripts organized by
                     Martin Lee and Cosima Wagner; the Multilingual DH Group and the efforts of Quinn Dombrowski; the RTL (Right to Left) workshop at the Digital Humanities Summer
                              Institute organized by Kasra Ghorbaninejad and
                     David Wrisley; and one-and-a-half day workshop Disrupting Digital
                        Monolingualism
                     organized by the Language Acts and Worldmaking Project. Research
                  materials and infrastructure for these languages are absent or in outdated
                  formats, digitization is either partial or piecemeal, and accessing those digital
                  resources can be a daunting task.To this question of infrastructure, one
                     really needs to add contemporary forms of inaccessibility that researchers —
                     local and global — experience in times of reduced funding and mobility.
                  In the larger case of Ottoman Turkish, there is a lack not only of sufficient
                  machine-readable corpora but also of natural language processing (NLP) tools
                  designed to work with the multi-layered, multi-epoch complexities of this
                  historical language.While there is a small community of Turkish developers
                     working on NLP tools for modern Turkish in open source environments, these are
                     still far from being fully workable platforms. Neither are they sufficiently
                     comprehensive to accommodate the complicated orthography of Ottoman Turkish. To
                     our knowledge, the most advanced NLP tool for Turkish so far developed is
                      Zenberek. Also see Sezer et al. (2008) and Sak
                        et al. (2008). When the archive is so abundant, yet still so
                  inaccessible, the eagerness to open up research fields to exploration with digital
                  methods grows every year.There have been several initiatives in recent years
                     to introduce digital tools and methods to the field of Ottoman studies. The
                     most notable is OpenOttoman, an online platform to foster collaborative
                     DH scholarship among Ottomanists. For an overview of the objectives of the
                     platform, see Singer (2016).
                        The Baki Project and the
                    Ottoman Text Archive Project are the two other noteworthy
                     projects for creating textual DH platforms for Ottoman studies.
               We believe that pursuing digital methods in some non-Latin script research fields,
                  such as Ottoman studies, is not so much a question of resistance to, or distrust
                  of, the methods as it is of the need for workable starting points, given the
                  historical and linguistic complexity of these languages.An excellent
                     argument for devising computational tools for such one such language,
                     nineteenth century Hebrew, is Soffer et al.
                        (2020). For a pilot study on the automated text recognition of
                     nineteenth century printed books in Bengali, see Derrick (2019). Although not in a non-Western language, Ventresque et
                     al.’s work on transcribing Foucault’s reading notes with Handwritten Text
                     Recognition technology is another important case study that seeks a workable
                     starting point for linguistically complex archival material . Furthermore, the desire for high-quality
                  text creation at scale can stand at odds with the capacity and affordances of the
                  platforms at our disposal to do so. Deferring the question of what kind of corpus
                  might be representative of late Ottoman society for now, and building on the
                  decades-long efforts to create open digital collections for reuse and high order
                  analysis, what has come to be known as a collections as
                     data approach , we turn to automatic
                  transcription of printed Ottoman periodicals with the Transkribus platform using deep learning methods. Whereas traditional
                  Ottomanist communities have relied on workarounds for research that depend on
                  informal labor for gaining access to archival materials, our case study argues
                  that technical workarounds within developing humanities research infrastructure
                  can, and do, spark innovation in the interest of linguistic inclusion.
            
            
               New Modes of Text Creation
               At the intersection of archives and the textual digital humanities is the central
                  question of access. Initiatives such as the EEBO-Text Creation Partnership have
                  opened exciting windows for a wide range of scholarly projects grounded in access
                  to historical print sources . Its presence can be felt
                  all over the scholarship in pre-modern English, and yet its mode of creation —
                  outsourced double typing of texts in Asian countries — casts an uncomfortable, but
                  often overlooked, shadow over the material conditions of its creation. Scholarly
                  communities working on languages printed in the Arabic script (Arabic, Persian,
                  Urdu, etc.) have been slower to arrive at robust textual digital humanities for
                  multiple reasons, not the least of which has been the difficulties of converting
                  the cursive-like printing of these languages into a machine-readable format . We anticipate that examples in
                  crowd-transcription, such as Transcribe Bentham (UCL), or more recent initiatives
                  spearheaded within the GLAM sector (Library of Congress, Europeana, the Newberry
                  Library, the Getty Museum, Zooinverse), and the democratized platforms for
                  engaging a larger public in doing so, will slowly make their way to cultural
                  heritage institutions in societies using RTL (right to left) scripts. What can be
                  done in situations, however, such as OT, when the script of the archive is no
                  longer native for the majority of the public? Our challenge has been not only that of automatic transcription but also rendering the output of this process sufficiently legible for the LTR (left to right) Turkish reader today
               Whereas some formal modeling has been done with OT (take for example, the markup
                  of multilingual versions of the Ottoman Constitution in TEI XML including OT and
                  Arabic versions , our intervention focuses at a more
                  rudimentary stage of new text creation; it is ground research that aims to produce
                  someone of the first, if not the first, searchable text corpus of OT. While this
                  situation might be surprising to digital humanists working in European, or even
                  large non-Western languages, for whom the existence of some kind of corpus has
                  been a given for many decades, the lack of basic keyword searchability is the
                  reality of text-based research in Ottoman studies.
               One key technological development that opened a promising pathway for the creation
                  of full-text searchable corpora for both printed and handwritten documents in
                  Arabic script is the recent advances in pattern recognition with HTR. Unlike many
                  OCR systems, which operate at the level of individual characters, HTR works at
                  line level and, as a result, yields higher accuracy rates in recognizing cursive
                  scripts such as Arabic.For an OCR system that is based on the same
                        line-level recognition principle as HTR, see Romanov (2017). Taking advantage of this
                  particular characteristic of the HTR technology, we have carried out our automated
                  transcription experiments for printed OT periodicals with HTR. The larger question
                  of the full Ottoman archive, most of which is manuscript, however, still sits in
                  the background of this article. Turn of the century printed materials in Ottoman
                  Turkish (or in Arabic or Urdu, for matter), do exist on a continuum with
                  handwritten materials, due to the fact that they are printed in a
                  cursive-like manner. It is too simplistic, therefore, to oppose print and
                  manuscript cultures in OT, especially because Ottoman master printers did, in
                  fact,strive to reproduce the calligraphic traditions of the manuscript culture in
                  the printed page .
            
            
               Why Periodicals

               After decades of digitization efforts in libraries and archives worldwide, the
                  number of periodicals that are available to today’s researchers has increased
                  dramatically. For the historian, the serial periodical offers special insight into
                  cultural debates as they unfold throughout time. Nineteenth-century periodicals
                  are the place of remarkable emergence of public discourse in many regions of the
                  world, including the multi-ethnic and multi-religious Ottoman Empire.See,
                     for example Baykal (2019), Karakaya-Stump (2003), Gülaçar (2018). They also provide a
                  valuable opportunity to reconsider this cultural sphere in a period marked by
                  rapidly evolving linguistic usage in the face of political change . Significant advances have been made globally in the
                  accessibility of cultural collections through digitization and the implementation
                  of full-text searchability and vibrant debates have opened up in digital history
                  on how to use this digitized archive to the fullest extent.
               There are a number of features of historical periodicals that make them complex
                  for digital analysis in any language: OCR quality, the commercial nature of
                  digitization collections, complex page layouts, the presence of images within the
                  text, and particularities of their digital remediation 
                  
                  . Yet again, the challenge of dealing with
                  Arabic-script periodicals is an even greater one. Whereas many periodicals have
                  been scanned and brought together in digital archives in these languages, allowing
                  researchers to access them at a distance, the texts of such periodicals are still
                  messy and not full text searchable, limiting users to slow reading and requiring
                  computer-assisted modes of analysis to adapt to the text quality.This is no
                     less true of OT periodicals collection at HTU and Arabic periodicals in large
                     collections such as Arabic Collections Online (ACO) and the
                     Qatar Digital Library (QDL). Unsurprisingly, the few studies that
                  have used various Ottoman periodicals collections as their main primary source
                  have so far been qualitative and of limited scope 
                  . The sheer volume of the available material, as well as
                  the outdated formats and piecemeal nature of their digitization, renders distant
                  reading of these sources unfeasible. These collections are not yet data.
            
         

            Part 2 - Transcription and Its Discontents
            
               Audience & A Pragmatic Approach
               Mastering OT today is a demanding task. People who undertake learning the
                  language/script nowadays do so in order to read historical manuscripts and
                  documents. Among those who are proficient in OT, it is not common practice to take
                  notes in Arabic script, but rather in what is the contemporary script habitus of
                  Turkish historians as well as that of the majority of non-Turkish Ottomanists: the
                  LTR Latin alphabet ; researchers in the field
                  simply tend to annotate their documents in Latin script. Owing to script
                  differences and language change, annotation style can vary from person to person,
                  with some researchers even transcribing their documents fully into modern Turkish.
                  Furthermore, in Turkey, editions of OT works are rarely published in Arabic
                  script, or if they are, they are accompanied by a facing-page transcription. As
                  such, the OT script in contemporary Turkey could be considered a dead
                  script. Being able to automate the transcription of OT to Latin writing system of
                  modern Turkish, therefore, is also a question of creating a knowledge
                  infrastructure that corresponds to a practical issue of contemporary script
                  literacy.
               The usage of terms for discussing the passages between languages and scripts, from
                  OT to MT, have varied significantly. Our Appendix (Key
                     Concepts) details how we use the terms transliteration,
                     transcription and romanization. These three terms all
                  imply some kind of passage between writing systems and they require careful
                  consideration if we are to adopt a critical approach to text creation of OT
                  printed material. We have come to realize that our approach to automated
                  transcription with deep learning methods needs to be a pragmatic one that balances
                  a number of concerns, such as paying enough attention to the requirements of the
                  HTR engine so that the model is effective while also being consistent enough so
                  that the digital reuse of the resultant data is the highest quality possible, at
                  the same time keeping in mind the needs of the human reader. We are aware that,
                  due to the particularities of OT, which we discuss in the following section about
                  the encoding of grammatical information, it will probably never be possible to
                  build an automated transcription system that flawlessly bridges the gap between
                  the original OT documents and their transcriptions. Our goal in applying neural
                  models of automated transcription to OT printed materials is, instead, the
                  creation of a decent text, a workable, good-enough approach to
                  transcription, a goal echoed by other historians working in digitally
                  under-resourced languages .
               No doubt this will be disappointing to our philologically inclined colleagues, but
                  it is the scale and the modes of downstream analysis that encourage us to adopt
                  this position. We do not see the text creation process as a failure from the
                  outset. Instead, working with automatic transcription has encouraged us to think
                  about the transcription process itself as an initial access point to the
                  historical materials. Our goal is to produce a result that is sufficiently
                  accurate and usable by our target reader (the historian scholar engaged in
                  professional reading), and we recognize that the end result will never look fully
                  like human-transcribed texts . From this starting
                  point, it follows that what is necessary to use HTR methods to bring new kinds of
                  access to a larger number of OT texts is a critical conversation about what is
                  commonly called transcription.
               We are particularly drawn to the idea of crowd transcription among Turkish
                  speakers that could transform the existing informal economy of OT transcribers
                  into a participatory community of shareable, open knowledge production. This will
                  not be possible, however, without a larger scholarly debate about transcription
                  and transliteration that departs from contemporary practices of inconsistent
                  romanization in favor of one that is more harmonized with the ways that
                  algorithmic systems work. Pilot studies such as ours with automated transcription
                  technologies are in a position to launch this debate. The question resembles one
                  that is asked regularly in human-computer interaction research: how do we design
                  interfaces and input mechanisms for human knowledge so that we can optimize the
                  results of computational processes? The answers to such questions can only emerge,
                  we believe, through the development of a user community that tests, evaluates, and
                  validates such transcription norms in different textual domains.
            
            
               Challenges of Transcribing OT and Its Implications for HTR Processing
               Ottoman Turkish, in its classical form, is a patchwork of Turkish, Arabic, and
                  Farsi vocabulary and grammar. The complexity of the language is compounded by the
                  challenges of the romanization of Arabic script in which OT was written . Elezar Birnbaum summarizes the complex character of OT
                  orthography as such: the Ottoman Turkish writing system
                        is only an indication of pronunciation rather than a
                        representation of it. It incorporates two quite different methods of
                        indicating sounds, which are ill-joined into one system... On the one hand,
                        Arabic and Persian spelling conventions are preserved almost intact for all
                        Ottoman words derived from those languages, while completely different
                        conventions, rarely explicitly formulated and still more rarely consistently
                        applied, even in a single piece of writing, hold the field for words of
                        Turkish and other origins, and for Turkish affixes to Arabic and Persian
                        loan words.
                     
               In contrast to the complicated nature of OT orthography, where several sounds in
                  the language are omitted in writing and the correct pronunciation of a word is
                  contingent upon the reader’s literacy and linguistic background, Modern Turkish
                  (MT) spelling is unequivocal and highly phonetic. This crucial difference between
                  the two writing systems renders a one-to-one, diplomatic transliteration scheme
                  from OT to MT unattainable.Birnbaum discusses this issue in detail in his
                     paper . This situation also partially
                  accounts for the fact that to this day there is no scholarly consensus on how to,
                  if at all, transcribe OT to MT.In the context of debates surrounding a
                     canonical seventeenth century OT text, H.E. Boeschton declared that a fully consistent transcription is impossible and
                        a transcription is a medium ill-suited for the
                        presentation of linguistic results
                     . The position we take in this study,
                     which is arguably the commonly accepted practice today, is formulated by Robert
                     Anhegger as a response to Boeschton: The guiding principle
                        should be to produce a transcription which is as easy as possible to
                        follow
                     . However, if we remember the
                  anecdote with which we began this article about the informal labor market of
                  transcribers, despite the lack of a transcription scheme based on consensus,Currently, there are four transcriptions schemes widely used in
                     scholarly publications: Deutsche Morgenländische Gesellschaft (DMG) system,
                     Encyclopaedia of Islam (EI, 2nd edition) system, International Journal of
                     Middle Eastern Studies (IJMES) system, and and Islam Ansiklopedisi (IA) system.
                     For a comparative chart of these transcription systems, see Bugday (2014). Turkish scholars tend to prefer
                     the IA system. Modern Turkish versions of OT texts that are produced for the
                     general population, on the other hand, often do not adhere to a strict system
                     but rather follow a loose transcription. As a case in point, the Turkish
                     Historical Society — a government agency for the study and promotion of Turkish
                     history — endorses a loose rather than scientific transcription
                     of post-1830s printed works. For archival material from the same period,
                     however, they recommend scientific transcription, a term they use
                     interchangeably with transliteration. Türk Tarih Kurumu, Eser Yayın Süreç: Çeviriyazı Metinlerde Uyulacak
                        Esaslar (https://www.ttk.gov.tr/eser-surec/eser-yayin-surec/). OT text
                  transcribed to MT is often preferred over original material as a matter of
                  practicality.
               To further break down the factors that hamper character-accurate, diplomatic
                  transcription from OT script to MT: There are only three vowel signs in Arabic (
                  ا, و , ى ) , which are often not represented but only implied in writing. MT, on
                  the other hand, has eight vowels and the written word is always fully vocalized.
                  Moreover, letters ( ا, و , ى ) are polyphonic, i.e., they correspond to more than
                  one sound in MT script. For example, Arabic letter (و ) may correspond to any of
                  the following characters in MT: ( v, o , ö, u , ü ). Several of the OT consonants
                  are polyphonic as well. Depending on the textual context, they may be substituted
                  by several different letters in the MT alphabet (Table 1).
               
                  Character correspondence chart of polyphonic OT letters
                  
                     Ottoman Turkish
                     Modern Turkish
                  
                  
                  
                     ا
                     a, e
                  
                  
                     ض
                     d, z
                  
                  
                     ك
                     k, g, ğ, n
                  
                  
                     و
                     v, o, u, ő,
                  
                  
                     ە
                     h, e, a
                  
                  
                     ى
                     y, a, ı, i
                  
               
               Finally, the phonological developments of Turkish language over the centuries and
                  the wide variation in its pronunciation across the vast geography of the Ottoman
                  Empire as well as across its socio-economic and ethnic groups at any given point
                  in time, created a gap between its written and spoken forms. This means that many
                  OT words may be pronounced in and transcribed to modern Turkish in several
                  different forms, all of which might be considered accurate. Any endeavor to
                  produce a “correct” transcription of OT in MT script is, in reality, an attempt to
                  recreate what we imagine was the pronunciation of the Istanbul elite at the time,
                  which, of course, is lost to us in its spoken form .
               One of the key steps in HTR is the creation of ground truth transcriptions
                  corresponding to segmented parts of the digitized image. Therefore, the above
                  three points have important practical implications for how we carry out
                  transcriptions. As an Ottoman Turkish text is transcribed into Latin script,
                  linguistic information is added to its romanized version by way of vocalizing it
                  and rendering it in one of its several alternative pronunciations, which might not
                  necessarily correspond to the written form. The presence of polyphonic letters
                  necessitates another layer of choices to be made by the transcriber. It is not
                  unreasonable to regard the reading and transcribing of OT as an art rather than a
                  science, a quality that does match the exigencies of the current generation of
                  computational tools, including HTR. The unavoidable addition of linguistic
                  information to the transcribed material is especially problematic when training a
                  neural-network based transcription system such as Transkribus, where one-to-one
                  correspondence between the original text and its transcription is essential. It
                  also results in the introduction of a significant degree of bias to the language
                  data that is provided by the transcriber for the neural network. We will discuss
                  these issues in more detail in Part 3.
            
            
               Previous Work on the Automated Transcription of OT
               There are currently two other projects that focus on the automated transcription
                  of Ottoman Turkish 
                  . Both are similar in methodology and scope, employing
                  morphological analysis and lexicon-based approaches to romanize OT script. Korkut
                  and Ergiş et al.'s studies take advantage of the fact that Turkish is an
                  agglutinative language, and that the stems of Turkish words do not inflect when
                  combined with affixes. Once an OT word is stripped of its affixes through
                  morphological parsing, the stem can be looked up in a dictionary for possible
                  matches in modern Turkish.The Arabic loanwords in OT complicates this scheme
                     significantly as Arabic stems do inflect. Therefore, a comprehensive dictionary
                     for such a system needs to include all inflected forms of the Arabic loanwords
                     in OT. At the next step, these two romanization models reconstruct the
                  stripped affixes in modern Turkish according to its spelling and pronunciation
                  rules and offer potential transcriptions for the original OT word in Latin script.
                  Both projects work with nineteenth and early twentieth century OT vocabulary,
                  presumably because dictionaries with relatively extensive content are more readily
                  available for this period than for previous centuries.
               An important distinction between these romanization schemes and our approach using Transkribus is their rule-based approach to automated transcription. Their systems
                  depend on conventional linguistic knowledge (dictionaries and grammatical rules)
                  whereas the HTR offers a statistical, brute force technique that utilizes large
                  data sets for pattern recognition without any explicit reliance on linguistic
                  information. While rule-based approaches might conceivably produce a higher
                  precision output, Korkut and Ergişi et al.’s methods still have important
                  shortcomings. In the absence of a rigorous OCR system for OT, it is not feasible
                  to transcribe longer texts in their interfaces. They can also only romanize those
                  words that are already in their databases. The scalability of these platforms
                  depends on the creation of comprehensive OT to MT word-databases/dictionaries,
                  which need to be significantly more substantial in content than anything that is
                  currently available,Korkut’s system currently has only about 43,000 words
                     while Dervaze boasts 72,400 OT words in its database. and the
                  development of effective OCR systems for the Arabic script to convert OT texts to
                  machine-readable format. Even if these two conditions are met, however, the
                  automated transcription of large corpora in these platforms might still be
                  prohibitively slow due to the time needed for dictionary searches to match the OT
                  stems to their MT counterparts.Korkut points out a few long term solutions
                     to this problem in his article .
            
            
               HTR for Automated Transcription
               In principle, an HTR engine can be taught to recognize any writing style from any
                  language. To start, the system needs to be provided with training data to identify
                  the specific patterns in a given body of text. In order to produce a reliable
                  transcription model for the rest of the corpus, it is imperative to create an
                  accurate ground truth, a literal and exact transcription of a small body of
                  sample text, that is representative of the corpus in question.
               While the absence of linguistic rulesTranskribus does allow
                     integrating custom prepared dictionaries into HTR training, but at present the
                     computational cost is too high to justify the miniscule improvement in the
                     accuracy rate of the automated transcription. Based on a correspondence with
                     the Transkribus team, however, we understand that there has been a recent
                     improvement in the recognition-with-dictionary workflow which speeds up the
                     process. In expectation of further developments in this vein, we have started
                     compiling a comprehensive digital Ottoman Turkish dictionary based on Ferit
                     Devellioğlu’s seminal work . Once the
                     dictionary is ready, it will be publicly shared on the Transkribus
                     platform. in HTR training does create certain shortcomings in the
                  quality of the transcription, we prefer the approach for its practicality,
                  time-efficiency, and scalability. HTR has proven to be most effective with large
                  corpora and after the initial investment of time for creating the ground truth, it
                  is possible to automatically transcribe hundreds of pages within a matter of
                  hours. The system is also flexible and accepts changes in parameters. That is,
                  with a large and diverse enough training set,By diverse, we mean a
                     training set that includes samples from various subdomains of the corpus in
                     question. These subdomains will ideally present variations in typeface, page
                     layout, and content, thus, in vocabulary and named entities. it is
                  possible to generate general HTR models that will work for corpora produced with
                  different handwriting styles or typefaces.As a case in point, the number of
                     general HTR models made available to the public in the Transkribus interface
                     have increased significantly over the last year, expanding not only the
                     language, but the domain and genre applicability of the method. For example,
                     the National Archives of the Netherlands has published a composite model for
                     Dutch-language documents of the seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth
                     centuries called Ijsberg, trained on dozens of handwriting styles in commercial
                     letters and notarial deeds, that has achieved a CRE rate of 5.15% . However, it is also important to
                  highlight here that what the creation of general models entail is not yet
                  well defined within the Transkribus environment. What combination of materials or
                  which order or re-training would produce best results appears to depend on the
                  size and the nature of the corpora and requires, at the moment, a trial and error
                  approach.
               One advantage of using HTR for OT is its relatively higher accuracy rate at
                  segmenting and recognizing cursive and connected writing styles. Unlike most OCR
                  based systems, which operate at letter level (for both segmentation and
                  recognition) and are, therefore, not very efficient for connected scripts such as
                  Arabic, HTR works at line level and recognizes characters in the context of words
                  and lines rather than as individual units.
               This renders it an excellent tool for languages written with the Arabic
                  alphabet.
            
         

            Part 3 - Our Experiment

            
               The Procedure
               The Transkribus platform produces automated
                  transcriptions of text collections by using customized HTR models trained on
                  partial transcriptions of the corpus. As we have argued at the beginning of Part
                  2, tools are often not a perfect fit for the historical source material we possess
                  and the results we obtain teach us a significant amount about our objects of
                  study. In this study, after significant trial and error, we ultimately reverse
                  engineered our research workflow to address critical questions of both the object
                  of study (the periodicals and their language) and the method itself.
               We created two sets of training data and corresponding HTR models for two
                     periodicalsWe take these two publications to be typical OT periodicals in
                     terms of page layout, typeface, and content. Transcriptions for the training
                     data were repurposed partially from the research material of Suphan
                     Kirmizialtin’s dissertation study and partially from the website Osmanlıca Mahalli
                        Gazeteler. Existing transcription texts were modified to normalize
                     spellings, correct transcription errors, and standardize the transcription
                     schemes. from the HTU online collection, the above-mentioned digitized
                  collection of OT periodicals. The first one of these publications is the Ahali newspaper, printed in Bulgaria between 1906 and 1907.
                  For this publication, we adhered to a loose transcriptionSee Appendix-Key concepts. scheme that only
                  indicates long OT vowels and does not use any other diacritical marks. The second
                  periodical for which we generated a training set is Küçük
                     Mecmua, published by the leading ideologue of Turkism at the time, Ziya
                  Gökalp, between 1922 and 1923 in Diyarbakir, Turkey. This publication has a
                  significantly Turkified vocabulary and a relatively standardized
                  orthography compared to other OT publications. We applied the Islam Ansiklopedisi (IA) transcription schemeSee note #22. for Küçük
                     Mecmua, which uses diacritical marks to differentiate between
                  polyphonic characters in the OT and MT alphabets. Our assumption was that the
                  regularized orthography and the detailed transcription system might help to reduce
                  ambiguity in the transcription text for this publication, providing us with a
                  cleaner starting point for the HTR. 
               The HTR neural network employed learns to recognize a script by matching
                  the characters, strings or groups of words in the image files with their
                  counterparts in the transcription. Adhering to a diplomatic transcription scheme,
                  therefore, is recommended for creating reliable HTR models. This basic principle
                  complicates the workflow for OT in Transkribus
                  significantly for two reasons; first, as we mentioned above, the lack of
                  one-to-one mapping between OT and MT scripts, and second, the opposite
                  directionality of Ottoman Turkish documents and their Latin script transcriptions. 
               To address the first issue and minimize the inconsistencies in the training data,
                  in our transcriptions we prioritized character accuracy over both the correct
                  pronunciation of the OT words and some of the grammatical rules of modern
                     Turkish.This most frequently occured in cases that involve the
                     conventionalized affixes of OT which violate the vowel harmony of MT. In such
                     cases, while character-accurate transcription results in archaic-sounding
                     pronunciation of those words (such as الدى : oldı - happened ;
                        ١وجونجى : üçünci - third) they are still easily recognizable by
                     modern readers; therefore, in those occasions, we opted to go with diplomatic
                     transcription. However, in other instances, where literal transcription, i.e.
                     transliteration, produces a pronunciation that renders the word unrecognizable
                     to the speakers of the Turkish language (for example, خواجه : havace ;
                        كوكرجىن : kükercin) we preferred the conventional pronunciation over
                        character accuracy (خواجه : hoca ;  كوكرجىن : güvercin). This decision
                     did, inevitably, introduce a certain degree of inconsistency to our HTR
                     models. We also opted for maintaining spelling mistakes and typos in the
                  transcription text exactly as they appeared in the original pages, rather than
                  correcting them. In other words, although these decisions seem counterintuitive to
                  the experienced transcriber, working with an HTR system for a RTL historical
                  language required us to unlearn some of the conventions of our practical
                  research habits for the purposes of transcription for creating training data. By
                  avoiding usual scholarly practices of transcription and giving the algorithm what
                  it needs to do its task, we hoped to optimize its performance.
               The first step of the HTR workflow involved transferring the images of the
                  documents into the platform, followed by the automated segmentation and layout
                  analysis for the recognition of text regions and baselines in these documents.
               The opposing directionalities of OT and MT come into play at the next step of the
                  workflow, in which images of the documents are linked to corresponding
                  transcriptions. While the Transkribus platform does
                  support RTL languages, it does not allow connecting RTL images to LTR
                  transcription text. To bypass this problem, we devised a workaround and reversed
                  the direction of our transcription text in modern Turkish from LTR to RTL (Fig
                     1).Here, we had to take into account the bi-directionality of OT. In OT,
                     as in Arabic, alphabetical characters are written RTL while numerical
                     characters are written LTR. To this end, we wrote a short script in
                  Python and ran it for the plain text files of our transcriptions.As
                     necessity can be the mother of invention, our hack to the system and our
                     initial results with OT prompted the Transkribus
                     team to develop and integrate a new functionality into the interface that
                     automates reversing of the direction of the transcription text.
               
                  A snapshot from Transkribus interface
                     demonstrating the transcription process. Note the left-justified, yet reversed,
                     Latin-alphabet transcription (center bottom) of the OT text (top right). The OT
                     text displayed in the canvas tool is from Küçük
                        Mecmua.
                  
                  
               
               After the careful preparation of the two sets of ground truth, sixty pages each,
                  we generated our first HTR models for Ahali and
                     Küçük Mecmua, yielding 9.84% and 9.69% Character
                  Error Rates (CER) respectively. In the second phase of the process, we retrained
                  the models by manually correcting errors in the automated transcription and
                  expanding each set of ground truth by an additional twenty pages. We also used our
                  initial HTR models as base models in the second round of training. The
                  manual correction of the automated transcription output, the expansion of the
                  training set by twenty pages, and the use of base models to boost the accuracy
                  rate of the later models have dropped the CER for Ahali newspaper to 5.15 % and for Küçük
                     Mecmua to 7.86%. (Table 1) As it is clear from these numbers, the IA
                  transcription scheme did not provide an advantage over the less detailed
                  transcription system in terms of CER. This might, however, be due to the
                  relatively modest size of the training data and a larger sample set might offer a
                  better comparison amongst the various transcription models.
               Finally, for text analysis purposes or human reading, the automatically
                  transcribed texts are exported from the platform and their directionality is
                  reversed to LTR.
               
                  The ground truths and the CERs for the first two HTR experiments with Ahali and Küçük Mecmua.
                  
                  
                     
                     First HTR Training Experiment
                     
                     
                     
                     Second HTR Training Experiment
                     
                     
                     
                  
                  
                    
                     Number of lines
                     Number of words
                     CER
                     Number of lines
                     Number of words
                     CER
                   
                  
                  
                  
                     
                        Ahali
                     
                     
                     3268
                     20572
                     9.84%
                     4931
                     31390
                     5.15%
                  
                  
                     
                        Küçük Mecmua
                     
                     
                     1928
                     12323
                     9.69%
                     2580
                     16326
                     7.86%
                  
                
               
            
            
               Cross-Domain Applicability
               The Transkribus platform allows the repurposing of HTR
                  models to re-train the neural network for recognizing different corpora as well as
                  community sharing of those models. In future work, we hope to take advantage of
                  this function to develop general HTR model(s) and evaluate to what extent they
                  might work for the entirety of the HTU digital repository. To this end, we will
                  focus on creating additional training sets from the holdings of this digital
                  collection.
               For the HTR technology we have at our disposal, the HTU collection of late Ottoman
                  periodicals is an ideal corpus. By the late 1870s the typeface for printing had
                  been standardized and a set of printing conventions for OT periodicals
                     established.By this time, naskh style typeface, cut by the
                     revered punch cutter and master printer Ohannes Muhendisyan, had emerged as the
                     standard continuous text typeface for OT publications . Furthermore, the OT press from this period
                  tended to cover similar topics and promote comparable agendas; as a result, they
                  contain similar vocabulary, terminology, and named entities. All of these factors,
                  along with the possibility of using a language model function,For
                     Language Models, see Discussion of the Results
                     section. contribute to the reduction of error rate in text recognition.
                  It is this uniformity of this printed corpus that, we hope, will allow the HTR
                  model to generalize across the entire HTU corpus with acceptable accuracy. It
                  should be said though that for scholars in the field who intend to expand HTR to
                  manuscript archives, finding a comparable corpus uniformity will no doubt be a
                  challenge.
               To test how the HTR model would function across different textual domains, we ran
                  the Ahali HTR model for three other periodicals from
                  the HTU collection. Attention was paid to include in the sample pool publications
                  from different time periods with distinct content and agendas. The CER for random
                  pages from these periodicals are as follows (Table 2): 
               
                  The newspapers used in the cross-domain applicability experiment
                  
                     
                        Name of Publication
                     
                     
                        Subject
                     
                     
                        Date of Publication
                     
                     
                        CER
                     
                  
                   
                     
                        Tasvir-i Efkar
                     
                     politics
                     1863
                     8.54%
                  
                  
                     
                        Mekteb
                     
                     education and literature
                     1891
                     10.26%
                  
                 
                  
                     
                        Kadınlar Dünyası
                     
                     feminism
                     1914
                     6.22%
                  

               
               It is important to note here that the CERs listed above were attained without any
                  training data from these publications or any correction and retraining of the
                  model. This is an encouraging indication suggesting that with the expansion of our
                  ground truth, it is, in fact, achievable to create viable general HTR model(s) for
                  the entire online collection of the HTU library.
            
            
               Discussion of the Results
               The primary challenge HTR faces when working with OT seems to be not character
                  recognition, but rather identifying OT words in their proper Modern Turkish (MT)
                  forms. As discussed earlier, the absence of one-to-one correspondence between OT
                  and MT alphabets leads to multiple possible transcription outputs. Even when the
                  HTR correctly identifies the characters in an OT word, accurate reading still
                  depends on precise vocalization as well as context-appropriate pronunciation of
                  the polyphonic letters. These, in turn, necessitate prior linguistic information,
                  which is not taken into account during HTR training. In other words, no deep
                  learning tool would be able to complete the desired task of a flawless MT
                  transcription.
               The recently implemented Language Models (LM)Language
                        Models (LM) estimate the probability of a specific word w given the history of words w1, w2,...using external language resources. Assuming that
                        these probabilities model the language of the current document well, we
                        output the transcription which maximizes a combination of the HTR
                        probability and the LM probability
                     . function in Transkribus appears to partially compensate for the absence of
                  rule-based text recognition in the platform. When supported with LM, HTR renders
                  Ottoman Turkish words in their context-accurate form as they are defined in the
                  training data. This, in turn, reduces Character and Word Error Rates.For
                     example, in our experiment with Küçük Mecmua, the
                     CER was reduced from 5.23% to 3.63% when the automated transcription was
                     implemented with the Language Model option. For example, the OT word
                  (عمله), which appears in our training set for the Kucuk
                     Mecmua periodical, has two possible readings, both of which are
                  character-accurate, imle and amele whereas only the latter is a
                  meaningful word unit in OT, the equivalent of the English word worker. In
                  our experiment, text recognition without Language Model transcribed the word as
                     imle. When we ran the HTR with the LM, however, the word was correctly
                  recognized as amele, the version that was defined in the training data. In
                  addition, the LM appears to be able to identify character sequences that are not
                  in the training data and even assign a high probability to an
                     inflected form without ever seeing it.
                  . This contributes to the accurate
                  transcription of words that are not in the training set. While this is far from
                  being the perfect solution for working around the ambiguities of OT, and a
                  significant departure from rule-based NLP systems, it is still a step towards
                  HTR-created, human-readable text. 
               Moreover, the neural network appears to be able to easily detect oft-repeated
                  words and word pairs (such as Farsi possessive constructions, which are
                  particularly challenging to identify in OT texts), presumably as a result of
                  line-level operations of HTR. Consequently, it is reasonable to expect that the
                  system will produce higher accuracy rates for document collections with formulaic
                  language or corpora dealing with similar subjects and vocabulary. It is
                  tempting to imagine a future of not only language-blind HTR, but also one
                  that is language agnostic, or even multilingual adaptive, that can learn the
                  particular linguistic strata or multilingual usage in a given corpus. It is still
                  important to underline, however, that a more comprehensive solution to the problem
                  of multiple possible outputs in OT transcription might be the integration of
                  dictionaries/word indices into the system.See note
                        #26. In the absence of such an option, the best alternative
                  would seem to be providing the HTR and LM with a larger sample of language data to
                  account for a greater degree of orthographical variance.
               Stemming from our experience with generating HTR models for different
                  publications, we infer that the best approach to extensive collections, such as
                  HTU, is to create date/period specific HTR models for subsets of those corpora.
                  The late nineteenth century was a time of accelerated linguistic development and
                  experimentation for Ottoman Turkish, both in its spoken and written forms.
                  Therefore, temporal (and/or genre) proximity of publications in sub-groups is
                  likely to contribute to the creation of more accurate HTR models. This would,
                  presumably, also be the most practical approach to the automated transcription of
                  the Ottoman manuscript archive, which is considerably more sizable than the print
                  documents and publications in this language.
               Finally, our experiment with HTR for OT print material affirmed the widely
                  accepted conceptualization of transcription as a biased process and that machine
                  facilitated transcription is no exception to this. Both HTR and LM rely on the
                  language data provided by the transcriber; they, in turn, reproduce the
                  transcriber’s linguistic bias in the output. As aptly described by Alpert-Abrams:
                        The machine-recognition of printed characters is a
                        historically charged event, in which the system and its data conspire to
                        embed cultural biases in the output, or to affix them as supplementary
                        information hidden behind the screen.
                      In the case of the automated
                  transcription of OT, the imposition of a uniform transcription scheme on the
                  language obscures regional, temporal, and ethnic varieties in its pronunciations
                  and creates an artificially homogeneous outlook for OT which does not reflect the
                  historical reality of the language. For our project with OT periodicals, however,
                  this point is less of a concern because these publications tended to, indeed,
                  adhere to the standards of high Ottoman, that is, to an OT spoken and
                  written by the educated elites of the Empire. Still, the language information we,
                  as the users of the automated transcription platform, impose on the neural network
                  does not only affect the quality and readability of the output but also has
                  important downstream implications from keyword searches and Named Entity tagging
                  to other NLP applications to OT corpora. Corpora creation has for a long time been viewed as a complex political process, and with deep learning and computationally intensive models, this is no less the case.
            
         

            Conclusion
            In our paper we have discussed ongoing research into text creation via automatic
               transcription in order to bring OT into dialogue with analytical modes of the textual
               digital humanities. The limited development and application of OCR methods compatible
               with Arabic script languages has no doubt been one of the rate determining steps, not
               only in the development of textual corpora, but also in the attendant language
               technologies that support the use of such corpora. To wish — in 2022 — for basic keyword search capacity within digitized media of the nineteenth and early twentieth century might seem to some as a rather old fashioned request, and yet for
               Ottomanists, it is an actual one. Limited access to digitized versions of the
               archive, a lack of language- and script-specific OCR in addition to a lack of
               scholarly infrastructure in the OT situation have meant that scholars have been slow
               to adopt digital methods.
            The landscape of Arabic script languages is changing rapidly, especially with neural
               automatic transcription systems, as they can accommodate cursive-like scripts and
               typefaces. In order for these systems to perform well, however, they will require
               training on many more domains and spatio-temporal variants of the language and
               handwriting styles. In the case of printed materials, training on different typefaces
               and printing conventions will also be necessary.
            A move to new transcription methods for OT will not mean the total automatization of
               the transcription process, removing it from scholarly labor; instead it will require
               a reorganization of those efforts from informal to somewhat organized one. We do not
               expect that people will stop transcribing small amounts by hand for specific
               purposes, but we do suspect that it will change the way that large text creation
               projects work, as well as how archives create finding aids as digitized material
               becomes available.
            In the specific case of printed periodicals in OT, in order to achieve the goal of
               enabling keyword searching and more complex forms of modeling and analysis of OT
               textual content via HTR produced text, a multi-pronged approach will be required.
               First, a team-based approach to transcription for the purposes of the creation of
               ground truth will be required (or even some crowdsourced, community-based approaches
               that have yet to be defined). Such a community effort might be achieved by sharing
               the model generated for the HTU print collection publicly, although how the endeavor
               would scale remains to be seen. Second, even though the platform-as-service model of
               the READ COOP may provide scholars with a variety of public models, the computing
               resources that allow these to run might exclude scholars and archives without the
               resources to buy in. It may be that only open models provide a more sustainable
               solution. Third, research is needed not only to recognize the Arabic script that is
               used in the specific genre discussed in this article — periodicals — but also, as in
               many other language situations, for structure recognition and image extraction that
               would allow for formal modeling of the resultant periodicals as research objects.
            We are not experts in the histories of all writing systems, but we believe our
               results may be applied to other language situations that have changed, or have used
               multiple, scripts over time: Aljamiado, Azeri, Bosnian, Crimean, Judeo-Spanish, Malay
               and Wolof, just to name a few. Our research with automatic transcription of
               periodicals printed in the Ottoman Empire during the mid nineteenth to early
               twentieth century has important implications for multi-script archives of
               nation-states located in the borderlands of empires and religions. After all,
               language reforms forged new modernized versions of languages such as Hebrew and
               Arabic while maintaining their original scripts, but in other places writing systems
               were changed altogether. As we described in depth above, in Turkey the Arabic script
               of OT was abandoned in favor of a modified Latin alphabet. The political
               disintegration of states at other moments of the twentieth century, in particular the
               former Yugoslavia and Soviet Union, led to fragmentation of similar languages into
               script-divergent varieties that both straddle current political borders and co-exist
               with older variance found in archives. If script change comes about in moments of
               radical political change enacting ruptures in archives, it also seems to map onto a
               slow globalizing of the Latin script — and not without significant political debate —
               in different countries around the world around the turn of the twenty-first century.
               Turkmenistan adopted a Latin alphabet in the late 1990s as well as Kazakhstan as
               recently as 2017. This geopolitical context raises the question of what will become
               of digitized archives in such locales — printed and handwritten — and adds totally
               new contours to the notion of the great unread in nations already cut off from
               the scripts of their past, as well as those that may be facing a phasing out of old
               alphabets. Future developments in digitization and text creation from borderland
               archives — if they are to happen — need to take into account not only the automatic
               transcription of written language, but also the various writing systems in which
               those languages will be expressed.
         

            Key Concepts: Transcription, Transliteration, Romanization
            There are a number of terms that are intrinsically related, and some of which we use
               interchangeably in this paper, that are central to our automated recognition of OT
               project.
            Transliteration is the substitution of the characters of a script by those of another
               alphabet. In an ideal transliteration, each character of the source script will be
               represented with only one and always the same symbol in the target writing system,
               creating a one-to-one mapping, or graphemic correspondence, between scripts.
            Transcription, on the other hand, is the representation of the sounds of an alphabet
               with the characters of another script. A transcription attempts to offer an accurate
               phonetic rendering of the source language even when this violates the graphemic
               correspondence between scripts. This means that, depending on the textual context, a
               polyphonic character- a letter that represents more than one sounds- may be
               substituted by several different letters in the target alphabet. In some cases, the
               reverse might be true. In the instance of OT transcription to modern Turkish,
               transcription also involves representing sounds, vowels to be more specific, which
               are only implied but are not written in the original text. Precisely because of this,
               the transliteration of OT inevitably becomes transcription.
            A popular, or loose, transcription, is an approximation of the conventional
               orthography and popular pronunciation of a word in a different script. It will
               produce a transcription that is easy to follow by contemporary audiences while
               inevitably forgoing important linguistic information in the original text.
            Finally, romanization is the substitution of the characters of a non-Roman script by
               those of the Roman alphabet .
         
