Title:  Digital Humanities and Natural Language
                    Processing: 
Volume:  014
Issue:  2
Date:  19 June 2020
Abstract:  
                In spite of the increasingly large textual datasets humanities researchers are
                    confronted with, and the need for automatic tools to extract information from
                    them, we observe a lack of communication and diverging goals between the
                    communities of Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Digital Humanities (DH).
                    This contrasts with the wealth of potential opportunities that could arise from
                    closer collaborations. We argue that more efforts are needed to make NLP tools
                    work for DH datasets so that that NLP research applied to humanities data
                    receives more attention, leading to the development of evaluation approaches
                    tailored towards relevant research questions. This has the potential to bring
                    methodological advances to NLP, while at the same time confronting DH datasets
                    with powerful state-of-the-art techniques.
            
Full Body Text: 

                IntroductionJe t'aime… moi non
                            plus (French for I love you… me neither) is a 1967 song
                        written by Serge Gainsbourg for Brigitte Bardot. The
                            song was banned in several countries due to its overtly sexual
                            content (Wikipedia), but there is nothing sexual in this
                        paper.
                The recent years have witnessed an increased interest in Digital Humanities (DH)
                    textual datasets within the Natural Language Processing (NLP) community, as
                    several initiatives (such as the Computational Humanities group at
                            Leipzighttps://ch.uni-leipzig.de/about/ (Last accessed on
                        20/05/2020). and the Computational Humanities committee),https://www.ehumanities.nl/computational-Humanities/ (Last
                        accessed on 20/05/2020). workshops (such as Computational Humanities
                            2014,https://www.dagstuhl.de/en/program/calendar/semhp/?semnr=14301
                        (Last accessed on 20/05/2020). Teach4DH,https://teach4dh.github.io
                        (Last accessed on 20/05/2020). COMHUM 2018,http://wp.unil.ch/llist/en/event/comhum2018/ (Last accessed on
                        20/05/2020). and the various editions of the LaTeCH-CLfL
                            workshops),https://sighum.wordpress.com/events/latech-clfl-2018/ (Last
                        accessed on 20/05/2020). and publications testify to 
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    . Research in this area has focussed on developing
                    new computational techniques to analyse and model humanities data. This interest
                    stems from the methodological and technical challenges posed by these datasets,
                    including those related to non-standard textual or multi-modal input, historical
                    languages, multilinguality, and the need for advanced methods to improve the
                    quality of digitization and for semi-automatic annotation tools. A number of
                    successful results have been achieved, especially in the area of handwriting
                    recognition , computational stylistics , historical natural language processing pipelines
                        , authorship attribution , and semantic change detection , to name a few examples.
                In spite of this growing activity, there is a real danger that NLP research on DH
                    datasets does not take into account all the complexities of the phenomena and
                    corpora, as others have pointed out 
                    . Moreover, NLP work on DH data has often been
                    confined within the limits of the NLP community, which leads to serious
                    methodological limitations for its applicability to DH and humanities research.
                    In spite of the huge potential impact of NLP for DH datasets, NLP activities
                    aimed at applying and adapting NLP research to the needs of the humanities are
                    still marginal. This can be explained by the standard processes that the
                    discipline adopts. Because the emphasis is on developing new computational
                    systems or improving existing ones, it is very important that these are
                    evaluated on standard datasets using reproducible methods. This means that there
                    is an incentive for NLP researchers to work on very restricted sets of datasets
                    and languages, leading to the development of tools which are optimized for those
                    datasets and languages. This drives research towards a very specific direction,
                    away from the idiosyncratic features displayed by historical languages and DH
                    data. Moreover, publication venues dedicated to NLP methods for DH are few and
                    do not set the mainstream agenda of the field. Coupled with the challenges and
                    the effort required to work on DH datasets, this means that engaging with this
                    line of research appears to be a less than attractive option for most
                    scholars.
                On the other hand, a large part of humanities research involves analysing and
                    interpreting written texts. Over the past few years large digital text
                    collections have become available to the scholarly community, but where DH
                    scholars confront Big Data to answer humanities questions, they often rely on
                    methodologically un-sophisticated tools such Google Books Ngram Viewer . There is a real danger that these
                    non-scientifically rigorous approaches will become state of the art .
                In this article we aim to draw attention to the lack of communication between the
                    communities of NLP and DH. In spite of its damaging effect on the progress of
                    the disciplines, we believe this lack of communication and miscommunication are
                    underestimated. We argue that what is needed is to bridge the gap between the
                    highly technical state of the art in NLP and the needs of the DH community. We
                    also offer a solution to this situation, inviting DH researchers to play a more
                    active role in making NLP tools work for their data in order to give new
                    insights into their questions, while at the same time advocating for a higher
                    profile of NLP research applied to humanities data. Institutions also need to
                    play a role in enabling better communication between the two communities,
                    promoting interdisciplinary work and multi-author publications; publication
                    venues welcoming such NLP/DH collaborative research also have an important role
                    to play.
            

                Contexts
                An informal definition of the scope of DH was given by Fitzpatrick commenting on
                    the DH 2010 conference, as a nexus of fields within
                            which scholars use computing technologies to investigate the kinds of
                            questions that are traditional to the humanities [...] or who ask
                            traditional kinds of humanities-oriented questions about computing
                            technologies
                        . Though informal, this broad
                    characterization agrees with the variety of work described as DH in overviews of
                    the field 
                    .
                More recently, some authors  have
                    observed two types of research in the work described as DH in the overviews just
                    cited. First, what Biemann et al. call DH proper, which in their
                    characterization focuses on digital resource creation and access. Second,
                    research which these authors call Computational Humanities, and which
                    analyzes digital materials with advanced computational techniques, while trying
                    to assess the value of those computational means for addressing humanities
                    questions. They see work in what they term Computational Humanities as
                    situated in a continuum between the humanities or the DH (according to their
                    definition of the latter term) and Computer Science. Therefore, should we want
                    to adopt the Digital vs. Computational Humanities terminology sometimes
                    proposed, the work referred to here can be considered within the Computational
                    Humanities. However, in the rest of this paper we will use the more widely
                    adopted term of DH. In 2019, a heated debate emerged around the role of
                    computational analysis in the study of literature specifically, after the
                    publication of Nan Da's paper, which questions whether the computational
                    analysis of literary texts can bring any additional insight in literary studies
                        . Counterarguments to such claims were offered by
                    computational literary studies researchers 
                    . We do believe that computational methods
                    can contribute to literary text analysis, and cite some examples related to
                    character identification below. We agree, however, with Da's emphasis on the
                    need to use computational tools optimally . As
                    we argue below, this can involve considerable work in order to adapt to the
                    specifics of a DH-relevant dataset, going beyond the tools' default
                    configuration and requiring at times novel evaluation procedures.
                Data relevant for social sciences and humanities research often take the shape of
                    large masses of unstructured text, which is impossible to analyze manually. For
                    example, regarding the use of textual evidence in political science, a variety
                    of relevant text types have been identified, such as regulations issued by
                    different organizations, international negotiation documents, and news reports
                        . Grimmer and Brandon conclude that [t]he primary problem is volume: there are simply too many
                        political texts. In the case of literary studies, the complete text
                    of thousands of works spanning a literary period 
                     are beyond a scholar’s reading capacity,
                    and researchers turn to automated analyses that may facilitate the understanding
                    of relevant aspects of those corpora.
                Because DH researchers now face volumes of data that cannot be analyzed manually,
                    NLP technologies need to be applied and adapted to specific use cases,
                    integrating them in user interfaces to make the technology more easily usable by
                    domain experts from the humanities and social sciences. Besides, a critical
                    reflection on the computational tools and methods developed must be initiated,
                    based on an evaluation by domain experts who are expected to benefit from those
                    technological means.
                We argue that researchers in the social sciences and humanities need ways to gain
                    relevant access to large corpora. NLP can help provide an overview of a corpus,
                    by automatically extracting actors, concepts, and the relations between them.
                    However, NLP tools do not perform equally well on all texts and may require
                    adaptation. Furthermore, the connection between these tools’ outputs and
                    research questions in a domain expert’s field may not be immediately obvious and
                    needs to be made explicit and kept in mind in the development of computational
                    tools. Finally, evaluating the usefulness of an NLP-based tool for a domain
                    expert is not trivial and ways to enable accurate and helpful evaluations need
                    to be devised.
            

                Different Datasets
                Research in NLP aims to build tools and algorithms for the automatic processing
                    of language . In NLP, such systems are typically
                    evaluated against baseline and existing systems with the aim to improve various
                    measures of accuracy, coverage, and performance. Because the focus is on
                    developing optimal algorithms, it is common practice to build and evaluate them
                    based on existing, standard corpora. This way, it is possible to compare
                    different approaches in a systematic way.
                In the case of DH research, however, the focus is not so much on the algorithms
                    as on the results that they lead to, which help the researchers answer their
                    research questions. In this context, each study tends to focus on a specific and
                    often unique dataset, with an emphasis on achieving satisfactory and insightful
                    results using or adapting existing methods, if possible.
                Several differences separate corpora typically used in NLP research from such DH
                    datasets. First of all, size is typically very large in the former case, unless
                    it is a particular aim of the research to optimize algorithms for small
                    datasets. Moreover, with the exception of the cases in which the NLP research is
                    focussed on a specific domain (such as medical, legal, etc.), balanced corpora
                    are typically used. This ensures that the systems developed on such corpora can
                    be generalized to the language as a whole, in line with generally accepted
                    definitions of a corpus as a collection of pieces of
                            language text in electronic form, selected according to external
                            criteria to represent, as far as possible, a language or language
                            variety as a source of data for linguistic research
                        . In DH research, on the other hand, if
                    answers to more general questions are sought, they rarely concern linguistic
                    phenomena per se, and the aim of generalization is instead replaced by the need
                    to describe and further explore the datasets at hand. Sometimes these take the
                    form of archives, which, unlike corpora, are not collected with the aim to
                    represent a language variety. Therefore, it may not be an option to modify the
                    size of the corpus without changing the scope of the research, as the research
                    question is bound to a specific set of texts. In the case of historical
                    languages, for example, unlike current languages, it is often not possible to
                    increase the size of the data because the amount of transmitted texts is limited
                    by particular historical circumstances .
                DH studies normally do not involve balanced datasets according to criteria such
                    as genre, style, register, etc. Another important difference concerns the
                    quality and format of the texts, with particular reference to historical texts.
                    Because almost every DH study requires its own dataset, a necessary preliminary
                    step of the research process consists in acquiring the texts, if they are not
                    already available. When Optical Character Recognition (OCR) is chosen, the texts
                    will likely require a significant amount of processing before they reach an
                    acceptable level of quality, otherwise there is a serious risk that standard NLP
                    tools will fail to provide satisfactory results .
                    This is sometimes complemented with other challenges inherent to historical
                    texts and which have to do with diachronic variation, including spelling
                    variation and other types of language change. This means that a diachronic
                    dimension needs to be included in the text processing when applying NLP tools
                    developed for current languages or based on synchronic corpora. We argue that DH
                    corpora can usually be used without the privacy concerns of user-generated data.
                    At the same time, the challenges that come with them offer a good test case not
                    only to pursue meaningful DH questions, but also to measure the robustness of
                    state-of-the-art algorithms.
                Natively digital texts are not exempt from the caveats above. A case illustrating
                    this is the work on the Earth Negotiations Bulletin
                    (ENB) corpus 
                    . ENB’s volume 12 consists of reports summarizing
                    participants’ statements at international climate negotiation summits, where
                    global climate agreements are handled. The goal of the study was to
                    automatically identify where participants stand with respect to negotiation
                    issues (support or opposition) as well as regarding other participants, thanks
                    to syntactic and semantic role annotations obtained with an NLP toolkit. The
                    corpus covers a period starting in 1995, and it contains what we might call
                        historical HTML varieties, as well as fixed column-width plain-text
                    formats that required normalization before the content can be input to the NLP
                    pipeline. In addition to this type of normalization, language use in the corpus
                    has several non-standard traits, for which it was necessary to adapt the NLP
                    toolchain (see section 4 below). In other respects, this corpus displays some of
                    the typical features of DH datasets that we described above: it does not seek to
                    represent a linguistic phenomenon, instead it is the set of texts required to
                    answer domain-specific research questions. Venturini et al. argued that the
                    corpus is a good choice to study climate negotiations, given that the corpus
                    editors strive to cover participants in a balanced way, using a neutral and
                    controlled language, although its specific linguistic characteristics need not
                    generalize to political reporting texts .
                When the texts are already available to the DH community, they are often encoded
                    according to the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) markup, which has become a
                    standard in DH. This markup focusses on editorial aspects and structural
                    properties of the texts themselves, and less on their linguistic features. This
                    contrasts with the state of the art in NLP, where corpora typically have shallow
                    metadata information and are often rich in linguistic annotation . Some linguistic corpora using
                    TEI are however available, e.g. the National Corpus of Polish 
                    . Although traditions have diverged since
                    then, at its inception the TEI was sponsored by both DH-related and NLP-related
                    professional associations . Also, major cultural
                    works encoded in TEI have been annotated with morphosyntactic information, e.g.
                    Dante’s works . Therefore, extra processing and
                    particular attention is required when employing NLP tools on such texts.
            

                NLP Techniques in DH and Their Challenges
                The DH research process can sometimes include an NLP pipeline, such as sentence
                    segmentation, tokenization, lemmatization or stemming, or part-of-speech
                    tagging. These steps are often required in order to conduct further analyses,
                    either because they contribute to cleaning the texts, or because they
                    help the researchers identify individual linguistic elements of interest such as
                    word tokens, or classes such as parts-of-speech. This is often complemented by
                    the use of corpus linguistics techniques, such as collocation analysis or
                    various quantitative analyses of linguistic elements. In other words, the
                    boundary between computational and corpus linguistics blurs in the interest of
                    the DH research questions .
                Partially related to and building on the previous point, another way in which NLP
                    methods are used in DH research concerns those techniques that extract various
                    types of structured information from texts, including keywords, named entities,
                    and relations. Again, these steps usually precede further analysis, in the form
                    of qualitative or quantitative investigations, and can rest on other levels of
                    linguistic processing, such as syntactic or semantic parsing.
                Semantic processing can also support the identification and analysis of more
                    abstract entities, such as semantic fields or concepts, and their linguistic
                    realization in texts. For example, McGregor and McGillivray report on a
                    methodology for extracting explicit occurrences of smell in historical medical
                    records, the Medical Officer of Health Reports collected in London in the 19th
                    and 20th century . Given the large size of the
                    dataset, automatic detection of instances of smell-related words by drawing on
                    the distributional semantic properties of a small set of seed words enables
                    medical historians to extract relevant passages in the texts, which can then be
                    further analyzed, for instance geographically or diachronically.
                Some types of information are generally useful to understand a corpus. These
                    include actors mentioned in it (e.g. people, organizations, characters), core
                    concepts or notions of specific relevance for the corpus domain, as well as the
                    relations between those actors and those concepts. This is a critical element in
                    the analysis of the ENB, the climate diplomacy corpus mentioned in section 3
                        . As the corpus covers international negotiation
                    reports, in order to understand its content it is essential to know not only
                    which concepts were discussed in the negotiation, but also who discussed them
                    and with which attitude (in a supporting or oppositional manner). Syntactic
                    dependencies, semantic role annotations and coreference chains obtained with an
                    NLP toolkit were exploited to that end. The agent of a reporting predicate was
                    identified as a negotiation actor, and the message tied to that reporting
                    predicate was considered to express negotiation issues addressed by the agent.
                    The predicate itself (a reporting verb or noun) was seen as expressing the
                    actor’s attitude. The corpus has some non-standard linguistic features, and the
                    NLP toolchain had to be adapted to handle them. For instance, personal pronouns
                        he, she can refer to countries in this corpus, so anaphora
                    resolution had to be modified accordingly. Corpus sentences contain information
                    about several participants at the same time (multiple actors mentioned within
                    the agent role, or in adjunct roles), which also required a specific treatment
                    in order to identify as many relations as possible of the type
                        ⟨actor, predicate, concept⟩. A good
                    coverage of such relations is crucial to analyses on negotiation behaviour
                    relevant to domain experts.
                A widespread approach to gain an overview of a corpus relies on network graphs
                    called concept networks, social networks or socio-technical networks, depending
                    on their content . In such graphs, the
                    nodes represent terms relevant in the corpus (actors and concepts), and the
                    edges represent either a relation between the terms (like support or
                        opposition), or a notion of proximity between them, based on overlap
                    between their contexts. Creating networks requires a method to identify nodes,
                    as well as a way to extract relations between nodes or to define node proximity,
                    such as a clustering method. Networks have yielded very useful results for
                    social sciences and humanities research. To cite an example, Baya-Laffite et al.
                    and Venturini et al. created concept networks to describe key issues in 30 years
                    of international climate negotiations described in the ENB corpus, providing new
                    insights regarding the evolution of negotiation topics 
                    
                Established techniques to extract networks from text exist, and networks offer
                    useful corpus navigation possibilities. However, NLP can complement widespread
                    methods for network creation. Sequence labeling and disambiguation techniques
                    like Entity Linking can be exploited to identify the network’s nodes: actors and
                    concepts. The automatic definition of network edges is usually based on node
                    co-occurrence, while more detailed information about the relation between actors
                    and concepts is not usually automatically identified for defining edges.
                    Nonetheless, such information can also be obtained via NLP methods. As for
                    corpus navigation, networks do not in themselves provide access to the corpus
                    fragments that were used as evidence to create the networks; but they can be
                    complemented with search workflows that allow researchers to access the contexts
                    for network nodes and the textual evidence for the relations between them.
                The above-mentioned techniques are, in most cases, considered solved problems in
                    NLP research, and are normally developed and tested on a set of large standard
                    synchronic corpora of current languages. However, when applied to messy,
                    noisy, and/or historical texts, these tasks prove to be significantly more
                    challenging. This points to the need of more research to bridge the gap between
                    the DH and NLP communities, so that NLP tools can be developed with the
                    requirements of the former in mind. In this context, Perrone et al.  develop further a Bayesian learning model for
                    semantic change detection developed by Frermann and Lapata . Frermann and Lapata’s original system was built
                    with the aim to model the change in meaning of English words in a general corpus
                    covering the time period 1700-2010. Perrone et al. extend this to the case of
                    Ancient Greek. This extension is not trivial, as the differences between the two
                    corpora are substantial. The Ancient Greek corpus covers 13 centuries and its
                    content is highly skewed, as certain centuries are only represented by one
                    author or very few works, and some genres only appear in certain centuries. This
                    lack of balance means that the models need to account for the differences in the
                    texts’ features and their effect on word semantics. For example, the sense of a
                    word is highly dependent on the genre of the text it appears in. The Ancient
                    Greek word mus can mean muscle,
                        mussel, and mouse, but in medical texts is it more likely to
                    mean ‘muscle’, independently of the era of the text. As a result, Perrone et al.
                    modified the original system to incorporate genre information into the
                    statistical model, thus achieving improved accuracy of the system compared to
                    the English case.
                Applying NLP for text analysis in social sciences and humanities poses some
                    specific challenges. First of all, researchers in these domains work on texts
                    displaying a large thematic and formal variety, whereas NLP tools have been
                    trained on a small range of text types, e.g. newswire . Second, the experts’ research questions are formulated using constructs
                    relevant to their fields, whereas core tools in an NLP pipeline (e.g.
                    part-of-speech tagging or syntactic parsing) provide information expressed in
                    linguistic terms. Researchers in social sciences, for example, are not
                    interested in automatic syntactic analyses per se, but insofar as they provide
                    evidence relevant for their research questions: e.g. which actors interact with
                    each other in this corpus, or which concepts does an actor mention, and which
                    attitudes are shown towards those concepts? Adapting tools to deal with a large
                    variety of corpora, and exploiting their outputs to make them relevant for the
                    questions of experts in different fields is a challenge in itself.
            

                Evaluation and Usability
                In this section we first discuss the mismatch between the evaluation carried out
                    in NLP and the needs of DH scholars in terms of tool evaluation and tool
                    performance. Then, we present an example of a DH-relevant evaluation
                    approach.
                In the same way that exploiting NLP technologies to make them useful to experts
                    in social sciences and humanities is challenging, evaluating the application of
                    NLP tools to those fields also poses difficulties. A vast literature exists
                    about evaluating NLP technologies using NLP-specific measures. However, these
                    NLP measures do not directly answer questions about the usefulness for a domain
                    expert of a tool that applies NLP technologies. Even less do they answer
                    questions about potential biases induced by the technologies (e.g. focusing only
                    on items with certain corpus frequencies), and how these biases affect potential
                    conclusions to draw from the data 
                    . As Meeks et al. state, research is needed with
                        as much of a focus on what the computational techniques
                        obscure as reveal
                    .
                Let us take the example of a researcher interested in the analysis of characters
                    in different novels. Named-entity recognition is an interesting application for
                    the task, but existing tools are not always very accurate with fiction texts.
                    Moreover, named entities are not enough: the system must probably be coupled
                    with an anaphora recognition and resolution system, and with other modules able
                    to recognize titles and occupations, for example, as some characters may just be
                    mentioned by the title they have. Indeed, some available NLP-based systems for
                    character detection have taken such difficulties into account 
                    
                    . Standard NLP evaluations do not provide enough
                    information to evaluate if a tool will be accurate enough or not on a specific
                    corpus, and evaluating this is a hard and, above all, time-consuming task for
                    computational humanists. The character-detection papers just cited, accordingly,
                    developed task-specific corpora.
                To take another example, McGregor and McGillivray describe a computational
                    semantics system for information retrieval from historical texts, the Medical
                    Officer of Health reports from London for the years from 1848 to 1972 . The ultimate aim of this research was to answer a
                    specific question in medical history, namely the nature of the relationship
                    between smell and disease in 19th-century London. Therefore, the computational
                    system had to be evaluated in the context of the original research question and
                    according to metrics that assessed its suitability for the specific task at
                    hand, which was the retrieval of smell-related sentences in a specific large
                    collection of historical health reports, rather than on standard NLP metrics and
                    approaches.
                As we said in section 2, evaluation procedures for NLP tools are typically
                    focussed around the aim to improve the state of the art. In the case of DH
                    research, the objective is connected to a set of research questions, which are
                    typically not methodological or linguistic. A computational system may perform
                    very well according to standard NLP evaluation measures, but it is not usable in
                    DH if it does not help the researchers answer their questions. Moreover, the
                    converse scenario has also been attested: a system that attains low scores in an
                    NLP task may prove useful for a DH application. An example of the latter case is
                    automatic keyphrase extraction. A standard evaluation task took place within the
                    SemEval campaign . The best systems reached an F1
                    measure below 0.3. These scores in themselves may seem unimpressive, the
                    possible range being between 0 and 1. However, keyphrase extraction is routinely
                    applied in order to get an overview of a corpus in DH research 
                    , which suggests the usefulness of this technology for
                    corpus-based research in the humanities. The way the NLP task was defined at
                    SemEval (a keyphrase extracted by the candidate systems had to exactly match a
                    keyphrase in the reference set annotated by human experts for it to count as
                    correct) does not fully reflect the way the technology is useful for a corpus
                    overview in DH tasks, where inexact matches can still be useful. In other words,
                    a tool’s performance in a standard NLP competition like SemEval and the tool’s
                    performance with a DH-relevant corpus need not be related.
                In the same way that we encourage humanities researchers to accept automatic
                    textual analyses as complementary to manual ones, we would also like to insist
                    on the importance of understanding the limits of computational tools.
                    Initiatives in this direction have emerged, like Tool Criticism , which seeks to understand biases introduced by tools
                    and digital methods on a task’s results.
                We will now review an example of evaluation relevant to a specific DH task . That study evaluates a corpus navigation application
                    for the ENB corpus introduced above. The application relies on relation
                    extraction, based on an NLP pipeline adapted to the corpus. Based on the
                    pipeline’s results, a user interface (UI) allows users to search separately for
                    actors, their statements in climate negotiations, and their attitudes towards
                    negotiation items or other actors (support or opposition). First of all, an NLP
                    intrinsic evaluation for relation extraction was performed, comparing automatic
                    results with human reference annotations. The difference here is that,
                    additionally, a qualitative evaluation was carried out, based on interviews of
                    over one hour with three domain-experts familiar with the corpus: two of them
                    had previously published research on it, and one of them works at the
                    organization that produces the corpus reports. The goal of the evaluation was
                    threefold. First, to assess to what extent the corpus navigation application
                    developed for the ENB corpus helps experts obtain an overview of its content
                    (i.e. an overview of actors' behaviour in the negotiations). Second, whether the
                    tool can help experts gain new insights on the corpus: facts unknown to them
                    that emerge from using the tool, or new research ideas made apparent to them by
                    using the tool. Finally, another goal was to see if the quality (in F1 terms) of
                    the NLP-based system was sufficient for this specific application.F1 was
                        0.69 based on an exact match across system and reference results of triples
                        containing a negotiating actor, its statement, and the reporting predicate
                        (verbal or nominal) relating both. As an evaluation protocol, the
                    experts were first shown the corpus exploration functions available to them on
                    the UI, following the same steps with each expert. The experts were then asked
                    to come up with questions about the corpus, use the interface to obtain
                    information relevant to their questions, and comment on the results. As said
                    above, it was assessed whether the UI helps them gain an overview as well as new
                    insights into the corpus. The assessment was based on verbal evidence (expert
                    comments) or other behavioural evidence (queries and other operations performed
                    on the UI). The sessions were recorded and later transcribed non-verbatim:
                    expert comments were summarized, and a description of operations performed by
                    users on the UI was written up; the reports and session audios are publicly
                    available. Rather than asking experts explicitly for feedback, their spontaneous
                    comments were considered as possible evidence for or against the usefulness of
                    the system in terms of corpus overview and insight gain.
                The results that emerged from this qualitative evaluation highlight those aspects
                    of the NLP-based system that are useful or pose problems for domain experts.
                    Dynamic extraction of speakers as agents of reporting predicates, without
                    relying on a predefined speaker list, brought to light statements by
                    lesser-studied negotiation participants, that our experts had no data about,
                    like NGOs and interest groups on climate and gender or climate and indigenous
                    peoples. A perceived shortcoming of the system was its incomplete treatment of
                    complex predicates like express concern, where the informative part of
                    the predicate regarding the speaker's attitude to a negotiation issue is the
                    noun concern rather than the verb express. Such results, obtained
                    not from researcher expectations but from actual user feedback, can help shape
                    improved versions of the system, and even identify generalizable areas of
                    improvement for an NLP technology itself.Indeed, at the time those
                        evaluations took place, a current concern in computational linguistics  was how to represent certain complex predicates
                        (light verbs) in the lexical knowledge-base against which we automatically
                        annotated the ENB corpus (PropBank ).
                The main point here is that a simple evaluation task as the one we just described
                    can be informative in ways an intrinsic quantitative NLP evaluation would not
                    be. However, note that tasks like the one just described involve several
                    challenges, and the system just described could be improved. A first difficulty
                    is that, as reported before , study participants
                    often form an opinion about the intended contribution of a study, and they
                    believe that it helps the research if the experiment provides evidence for their
                    expected result. These beliefs can bias participants’ behaviour. The attempt by
                    Ruiz et al. to reduce this bias relied on avoiding to ask participants for
                    explicit feedback, but rather on recording their comments and behaviour,
                    although it is debatable whether such bias decreases this way. A second
                    difficulty is that collecting domain-expert feedback in the way described is
                    time-consuming; even finding suitable experts may be difficult, hence the small
                    number of participants in the study. Finally, as the NLP-based system was
                    exploited via a UI, the task could be complemented by an evaluation based on
                    Human Computer Interaction criteria, like usability or user satisfaction 
                    . Such an evaluation would involve defining tasks to
                    perform with the UI, employing a larger sample of domain experts. The proportion
                    of tasks completed successfully could be measured, as well as task completion
                    time; a questionnaire could measure user satisfaction. All in all, even the
                    simple small-sample qualitative evaluation task above was informative about
                    concrete aspects of an NLP-based system that helped or were an obstacle to
                    answering specific questions relevant to a DH-research task.
            

                Conclusion
                We would like to end this paper with a summary of the status quo and some
                    recommendations for the future.
                As we have seen, many DH projects are based on large or even very large textual
                    corpora. Sometimes it is not possible for the experts to know all the texts
                    included in their corpus, and in some other cases the corpus is complex and a
                    specific interface would help and quicken the analysis. In such contexts, it
                    makes sense to use advanced NLP techniques in DH research. NLP tools are now
                    mature and accurate enough to provide, in principle, reliable and extended
                    analyses of various corpora in literature, history, and other text-focussed
                    humanities fields. It is possible to annotate entities (people and locations,
                    companies and institutions), semantic concepts, technical terms and
                    domain-specific expressions. It is also possible to extract links between
                    entities, and derive a network of relations from the information included in the
                    texts in an unstructured form. It is even possible to represent relevant
                    information through navigable maps, so that the end user can navigate the corpus
                    and find relevant pieces of information scattered in different texts.
                However, despite the accuracy and robustness of current NLP techniques, these are
                    not yet widely used in DH. And, on the other hand, even if we see a growing
                    interest for social sciences and cultural heritage in the NLP community, this is
                    still quite marginal. The main issue is probably that the two communities are
                    fundamentally driven by opposite goals.
                The NLP community is interested in advancing NLP techniques, which means every
                    published experiment must be evaluated and compared to previous work and show
                    some improvement over it. The use of gold standards is thus of paramount
                    importance to perform this comparison. The drawback is a large standardization
                    of the research effort: many researchers explore broadly the same methodological
                    avenues, with the same techniques applied on the same data. In fact, the NLP
                    community tends to focus on one paradigm at a time and to produce a phase of
                    homogeneous research questions and methods, sometimes at the expense of leaving
                    out potentially interesting but less mainstream work. Today it is hard to
                    publish research in an NLP venue that does not use word embeddings, neural
                    networks and deep learning. Deep learning methods have had a huge impact on the
                    field, leading to a clear (and sometimes dramatic) improvement in performances
                    for almost all kinds of NLP tasks. However, we believe diversity of methods and
                    critical approaches to their use can only be beneficial.
                On the other hand, the DH community, generally speaking, is only secondarily
                    interested in processing techniques. The goal of DH is to shed new light on
                    humanities problems, taking into account the advantages of digital and
                    computerized methods. Evaluating processing techniques is a challenge, since
                    data are by definition always project-specific and there are no gold standards
                    in the same sense intended in NLP. Tools are thus used as they are
                        (off-the-shelf), sometimes after a brief evaluation and estimation of
                    their quality and adequacy for a given task, sometimes without any evaluation.
                    The complexity of current tools should also not be underestimated: most tools
                    are difficult to use and, even when they are open source, modifying them is hard
                    for most users and even most projects. Adapting tools to DH corpora is not
                    trivial: most tools nowadays are based on machine learning techniques, which
                    means large quantities of annotated data are necessary to be able to train a new
                    model or, in other words, to adapt the system to the corpus under study. This
                    means that even when the team is skilled enough to adapt a system, this
                    adaptation is not always possible in practice.
                All this explains the current situation and maybe some of the missed
                    opportunities. At this point, one conclusion could be that the two communities
                    are just different, they have different goals and, even if we can observe some
                    points of contact, these are marginal and not so interesting from a scientific
                    point of view. But in fact we would like to defend the exact opposite view.
                DH offers new, original and complex challenges to the experts, and these
                    challenges require new, original and complex techniques to tackle them. DH
                    research also offers real-world problems that are needed to prove that NLP
                    techniques can be applied to different languages than English, to different
                    corpora than newspapers and to different periods than just the 21st century. At
                    the same time, NLP tools and methods are often underutilized and a more accurate
                    choice of the techniques to use can have a strong impact on DH research. In
                    fact, we argue that adapting and tuning NLP techniques to the corpus or domain
                    under study is precisely where some of the most challenging, innovatively
                    interesting and impactful research can be.
                The dialogue between disciplines and the constructive and critical use of methods
                    that we advocate for implies that most projects need a multidisciplinary
                    approach. We acknowledge that more and more institutions support this
                    interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary research and even create new job
                    positions in this space, often spanning over several departments. However, more
                    needs to be done to properly support interdisciplinary careers. An academic
                    culture that favours single-author publications does not sufficiently support
                    multidisciplinary (and multi-authored) research. Institutions should acknowledge
                    this situation, which means promoting multi-author publications, and also
                    publications related to different domains, ranging from computer science to
                    traditional areas of the humanities.
                There is a growing number of papers mixing DH and NLP presented at conferences
                    such as the annual Digital Humanities conference or in the series of LaTeCH
                    workshops (Language Technology for Cultural Heritage, Social Sciences, and
                    Humanities). This indicates that there is a community, which sometimes calls
                    itself Computational Humanities and includes the community of NLP for DH, but
                    also research around techniques dedicated to image, video, sounds and music,
                    etc. However, the insufficient number of high-profile publication venues where
                    such research can be hosted penalizes scholars active in this space, as they are
                    less likely to be considered successful by academic standards. One
                    possible solution to this is that humanities departments recognize publications
                    in computer science venues as equally valuable as publications in venues
                    considered more traditionally humanistic.
                In addition to these academic cultural changes, we believe that changes to
                    research practices and publication standards can support the work at the
                    interface between NLP and DH. We have stressed that off-the-shelf algorithms are
                    often blindly applied, but it is hard to benchmark an algorithm’s performance on
                    a DH corpus due to its unique features. We propose that reproducibility and
                    algorithmic robustness checks are added to all NLP/DH publications, to
                    strengthen the methodological foundations of the research results. For example,
                    if a DH paper uses LDA topic modeling, a requirement for publication should be
                    that the authors run the analysis using differing values of the parameter for
                    the number of topics (k) and differing pre-processing steps.
                After stressing the challenges (and some possible solutions to them), we would
                    like to end this paper on a positive note, highlighting the interest of the
                    research at the frontier between these domains and the opportunities it brings.
                    The state of the art in both fields is advanced enough to contemplate combined
                    approaches, research opportunities happen at a global scale, ethical
                    considerations are a priority and the potential negative impact of the
                    increasing use of artificial intelligence in propagating fake news, for example,
                    is widely recognized. NLP for DH offers a unique opportunity to explore complex
                    data, and to show how we can deal with complexity to get a better knowledge of
                    our past.
                By increasing the recognition and support of computational scholars within DH,
                    NLP scholarship can become an attractive area of DH, thus creating space for
                    scholars who might otherwise hesitate to go into DH due to poor job prospects.
                    Just as the social sciences have successfully created space for these kinds of
                    scholars, which has benefited the social sciences overall, DH could achieve
                    similar results by adopting a similar strategy.
            

                Acknowledgements
                We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their thorough and helpful
                    comments. Thierry Poibeau’s research is partially funded by the PRAIRIE 3IA
                    Institute, part of the Investissements d'avenir
                    program, reference ANR-19-P3IA-0001. This work has been mainly done while
                    Thierry Poibeau benefited from a Rutherford fellowship at the Turing Institute
                    (London and University of Cambridge). This work was supported by The Alan Turing
                    Institute under the EPSRC grant EP/N510129/1.
            
