Title:  Networks, Maps, and Time: Visualizing Historical
               Networks Using Palladio
Volume:  015
Issue:  1
Date:  5 March 2021
Abstract:  
            
            Many tools can produce maps, graphs, and charts that may differ in seemingly minor
               ways. Data visualization tools are one type of middleware that can be all but forgotten when one is presented with final
               products such as papers and presentations containing visualizations . Since the output of various software packages is
               sometimes similar, it is easy to forget the assumptions that went into the diagram,
               the dataset, and the software when looking at the final product — or even while using
               the tool if one becomes sufficiently accustomed to the interface. In this review, I
               revisit the visualization suite Palladio – which Miriam Posner has called a Swiss Army knife for humanities data
                – and the many projects that have made use of Palladio’s
               core features in the years since its launch. I examine the strengths and limitations
               of Palladio, as a network and map-making tool for exploring data and for rapidly
               prototyping diagrams, designed with an iterative process in mind. I contrast this
               iterative mentality with the analytic sensibility of tools like Gephi and Cytoscape,
               and review the primary features of Palladio with one primary case study (my own
               visualizations of the French Enlightenment network) and examples of how the features
               have been used in other digital humanities projects. Palladio is very useful for
               qualitative studies of data that include geospatial and chronological dimensions,
               especially when the data are tagged with different types of qualitative metadata, but
               it also tends to impose a historical geographical view on the data by foregrounding
               geospatial relationships, time, and other historical considerations.
         
Full Body Text: 

            Introduction
            Data visualization is a complex process because creating a single visualization
               requires an understanding of principles of design and mathematics, as well as the
               content that is being visualized. For humanists, finding collaborators in data
               science and design can be a practical and financial challenge. Fortunately, there are
               some tools and tool sets which can aid with the design process and prototyping of
               diagrams. In this tool review, I revisit Palladio , a digital
               humanities package developed in the Humanities + Design Lab at Stanford University in
               a collaboration with the DensityDesign Lab in Milan. Palladio has now been available
               for more than five years and has been used to visualize everything from the
               appearances of ladies orchestras in Europe from 1870 to
               1918  to participants in Black Tech from 2014 to 2018
                  . I have surveyed as many projects using the tool as I
               could find and will include examples of use cases and feedback on the tool from
               projects worldwide. 
            Palladio is a tool for filtering data and quickly producing diagrams that display
               data spatially and alongside temporal dimensions like timelines and timespans; it
               lacks the network analytics of software packages built for mathematical analysis. The
               online app allows for the presentation of multifaceted data, such as network data
               with date ranges or categories like network type with location data. Palladio was
               developed in the Humanities + Design Lab by Dan Edelstein, Nicole Coleman, Ethan
               Jewett, Giorgio Caviglia, and others to fulfill partially the vision for Knot,
               an interface for the study of social networks in the
                  humanities
               . The Palladio tool suite lends itself to qualitative
               studies because the visualizations that it produces (maps, network graphs, tables,
               and galleries) are familiar to most humanists. Producing iterative versions of such
               diagrams for the sake of quick comparison between them is a good way to explore
               multifaceted data that have not been curated for one use or with one particular
               hypothesis in mind — a collaborative research process which has been referred to as
                  design thinking
               . As such, Palladio is a powerful tool for exploring
               data and patterns qualitatively. Unlike many other network graph packages, like Gephi
                  , with which it shares some network graphing features,
               Palladio does not have the capacity for network analytics and is limited in choices
               such as graph layouts, which are not customizable in Palladio but are in Gephi.
               Rather, Palladio presents an overall good fit for historical case studies. It is in
               this respect that Palladio is a kind of middleware — in
               the terms of Drucker and Svensson — or a software solution that makes important
               design decisions for the user and makes some of these design decisions less apparent
               to viewers of any resulting visualizations .
            Palladio was developed for use by historians and those working in related disciplines
               like area studies, art history, literary history, and media and cultural studies, in
               which historical time and space are useful concepts. The discussions which led to the
               creation of the tool followed a lab model: that is, analyzing
                  best practices, employing design research methods, engaging in peer critiques,
                  involving usability testing and user evaluations, and further expanding the role
                  of infoVis to the content of service design and the trends of design for social
                  good
               . The lab model, which is collaborative and
               open-ended, has frequently gone by the trendy name design thinking but is
               really just an abstracted form of the design process, which, in the case of Palladio,
               meant an ongoing collaboration between humanists and designers. The focus on ease of
               use, combining types of diagrams, and quick prototyping came out of Mapping the
               Republic of Letters 
               , a large project of which many component projects are
               historical, as well as a 2012 Humanities + Design Lab workshop that focused on the
               visualization of time and networks, Early Modern Time &
                  Networks. While those activities did not share a single methodology or set
               of research questions, they, for the most part, dealt with social networks in Early
               Modern Europe and the Americas from 1500 to 1800. The diversity of research projects
               presented a variety of use cases, from correspondence networks to travel itineraries
               to galleries of individuals’ photos. The involvement of DensityDesign was decisive
               for both the use of Mike Bostock’s d3.js library in visualizations and for the focus
               on prototyping and flexibility of tools. Like DensityDesign’s other open source web
               tool, RAWGraphs , Palladio provides a
                  missing link between spreadsheet applications (e.g. Microsoft Excel, Apple
                  Numbers, OpenRefine) and vector graphics editors (e.g. Adobe Illustrator,
                  Inkscape, Sketch)
               . Whereas Palladio generates mainly maps and network graphs,
               RAWGraphs can produce a wide range of charts from box plots to scatterplots to
               treemaps . As Yvette Shen has observed, RAWGraphs adopt[s] clean and crisp aesthetics of modern graphic design
               influenced by the Bauhaus School and the International Typographic Style with geometric layout, orderly typography, effective use of white space,
                  and simple color composition
               . Palladio similarly makes use of a modern graphic
               design style for both the interface and outputs.
             Since historians often have set archives or pre-established datasets but do not
               necessarily have preconceived ideas of what patterns they will find in the data,
               priority was placed on the ability to rapidly prototype diagrams to see whether
               interesting patterns appear, as well as the ability to filter data in order to look
               at subsets. Simplicity of the interface allows for the quick creation of diagrams
               that are highly legible in print format or as static images online; visualizations
               can be exported as SVG files to be refined in vector graphics editors like Adobe
               Illustrator or Inkscape. The maps and diagrams produced in Palladio are not
               copyrighted and can be printed in commercial and non-commercial works, unlike maps
               produced in Google Maps, for example. Palladio can also be used to produce tables and
               galleries that allow individual records to be explored via filtering by categories,
               timespans, and timelines. By moving between the maps/graphs and tables/galleries,
               researchers can find patterns in the data and then identify which records are a part
               of the patterns. Thus, the focus in using Palladio is on moving between diagrams and
               between types of diagrams rather than drilling down on one type of visualization or
               graph.
         

            Features and Case Studies
            In the interest of showing how this prototyping works and also explaining some of the
               features of Palladio, I will walk through some examples of diagrams produced in
               Palladio and discuss features like filtering that can be used to rapidly prototype
               diagrams. I will also give examples from other projects and comments from other
               researchers who have used each feature in their work. Since they are the most popular
               features, I will focus most of my commentary on maps and network diagrams. Other
               demos that review aspects of Palladio include Posner
                  (2014) and Marten Düring’s review in the Programming
                  Historian, where he concludes that it is platform-independent and particularly easy-to-use
               . Düring’s demo includes sample data and a thorough
               discussion of how to structure network data for visualization in Palladio, which I
               will not be able to treat here. The data used in my visualizations are correspondence
               and demographic data from the Electronic Enlightenment Project and the Groupe
               d’Alembert . The metadata are enriched according to the
               methods described in the article The French Enlightenment
                  Network
               . The French Enlightenment Network dataset is available
               online in multiple formats, with examples of diagrams in various formats here: http://bit.ly/VisualizingFEN. It is
               worth knowing that the dataset is a list of individuals with basic demographic data
               (name, birth and death places and years, nationality, gender, etc.) and also
               placement into one or more networks such as Letters_Philosophical for writers
               on philosophical subjects, and Aristocracy for members of the nobility.
            First, a few words about setting up the software and creating a dataset. Palladio is
               available as an installable software package or as a web tool; the web tool is
               available at http://hdlab.stanford.edu/palladio/. Either way, access is through a web
               browser. The first step to creating a visualization is to select Create
                  Project and input data. There are several ways to input data into Palladio.
               Data can be imported from a Google spreadsheet, a proprietary tablature file (TAB) or
               the more common tab-separated values table (TSV) or comma-separated values table
               (CSV), or copied and pasted from other applications like Microsoft Excel, Numbers,
               TextWrangler, or TextEdit. Data that are pasted into the online form and uploaded are
               then automatically recognized as text, numbers, dates, coordinates. If the data type
               is not recognized or misrecognized, that can be corrected by clicking on the pencil
               icon to open the data verification window and change the data type. Columns can be
               hidden by clicking on the eye icon; if they are hidden, it will not be possible to
               visualize the data in that column until the column is made visible again. The
               filename and the name of the data table can be changed.
            Within the data verification window, there is a preview of the data. There are two
               more functions to be aware of: 1) splitting multiple values and 2) extending the data
               table. Palladio supports multiple values, such as multiple tags for the same record;
               for example, the city of Berlin could be tagged German and Large city
               by creating a column for cities and a column for city characteristics; within the
                  city characteristics column would be German;Large city if the
               delimiter were a semi-colon. Using multiple values in a cell is useful for
               unstructured datasets where the rows and columns might be pre-determined but where
               researchers might want the freedom to add values as the dataset is created. For
               instance, most people might have one nationality, but a few might have more than one.
               In this case, most cells would contain one value, like American, but the
               nationality cell of a binational could contain two values, like
                  American;Mexican, that would be readable as separate values. The delimiter
               (any character, often a comma or semi-colon) can be selected within the data
               verification window; consecutive delimiters can be treated as one so that a comma and
               a space are counted as one. 
            The second feature, extending the data table, is useful if the dataset contains more
               than one table, or if the dataset has many repeated values which are consistently
               associated with the same values. One use case is for LatLong coordinates; where the
               primary dataset contains the same place multiple times, LatLong coordinates can be
               associated with those places by extending the Places column with a data table
               consisting of the Places as text and another column of coordinates. Similarly,
               metadata about texts and their authors can be kept on separate spreadsheets and
               combined within Palladio as long as there is one column in each data table that
               matches the values in a column in the other table.
            Once the dataset is imported and verified, the next step is to choose a type of
               visualization. Not all visualizations work for all data types. Map View needs
               coordinates. The Network Graph View needs at least two columns of data and should
               only be used if there is a consistent logic of connection between these two columns.
               Since Palladio doesn’t allow for much customization of graphs, the eventual product
               will be a bipartite graph with two types of nodes or entities. The edges, or links,
               cannot be weighted. The Gallery View requires images. Tables are very versatile and
               work well with large datasets. For this reason, it is important to think about what
               to do with Palladio before producing a dataset. Palladio is very flexible in
               importing data, but once it is imported, extending the data table may be the only way
               to add missing data types, and data cannot be edited within Palladio. I will now look
               at how to produce the four kinds of diagrams and some notable features of each. Mark
               Braude produced a very brief overview of features with screenshots . A more technical overview of features is available in Humanities + Design Lab (2014).
         

            Two Kinds of Maps: Points Versus Point-to-Point
            First, I will look at the Map View in Palladio. There are two map types: 1) maps with
               points sized according to defined quantities, which are useful for displaying static
               geographic information, and 2) point-to-point diagrams, which are more useful for
               showing movement or change over time. Maps can be used to compare the weight, or
               influence, of cities, as well as travel and communication between cities and other
               geographical points. The data for both of these map types can be filtered to show a
               subset of the data, according to categories chosen by the user.
            The first type of diagram (Figure 1) consists of points on a map. Producing diagrams
               of this kind requires LatLong coordinates for all locations. Such maps can easily
               display quantities associated with a particular place — for example, quantities of
               people, events, or items. Points maps are recommended for data on population, the
               production of books, the number of events, and so on. The nodes can be sized by the
               number of records at each LatLong. Figure 1 shows the predominance of Paris as a
               birth place for members of the French Enlightenment network. While the size of
               smaller points can be hard to make out, numbers of records and the names of places
               can be displayed on a tool tip so that hovering over each circle reveals the name and
               number of records at each point. Unlike in a list, it is easy to visually compare the
               weight of regions. Here the weight of the southeast is notable, despite the relative
               insignificance of each point in comparison to the total numbers for Paris. It is also
               visible that Lyon, at the center of the map, is a significant location for the birth
               of members of this group, although the central region otherwise has few important
               locations.
            
               Birth Places of Members of the French Enlightenment Network
               
            
            The strength of the points map is how easily it generates a simple geographic
               visualization. A list of places with LatLongs can be inputted in the data panel and
               visualized within seconds. Alternatively, a dataset can be uploaded with only the
               names of places and a separate table with LatLongs can be linked to the dataset.
               Doing so is recommended for large datasets with repeated places. Finally, a list of
               places with LatLongs could be uploaded with numerical values, such as the number of
               people born there. The flexibility of the tool means that many types of data can be
               visualized. It also means that an identical visualization can be produced in multiple
               ways without modifying the data. One limitation is that latitude and longitude
               coordinates must be in the same cell separated by a comma; both values must be
               combined before importing the LatLong data into Palladio. 
            The second kind of map is a point-to-point diagram (see Figure 2). Point-to-point
               maps are particularly useful for humanities research because they show network
               connections in a way that is intuitive to humanists by overlaying them on a map.
            
               Linked Birth and Death Places of Members of the French Enlightenment Network
                  with Timespan
               
            
            Point-to-point maps are ideal for displaying trajectories, such as travel, or
               communication between population centers, such as the sending of letters. This map
               type requires LatLong coordinates for two distinct locations. The edges — the
               connections between points — could represent any number of other network
               relationships between two locations. The points are sized according to the total
               count of the items associated with that location. Features that users found lacking
               include the lack of directionality in point-to-point maps 
               and an inability to produce interactive maps and diagrams .
         

            Filtering
            While maps are not new tools for humanists, digital technology allows for more
               sophisticated and rapid comparisons between subsets of data. Palladio makes filtering
               data easy and quick; in fact, producing a different map takes only a few seconds. In
               the case of the French Enlightenment Network, the individuals have been coded by
               gender, nationality, social networks (Elite, Aristocracy, Military, Court),
               professional networks (Artisan, Finance-banking, Cultural, etc.), and knowledge
               networks (Letters, Sciences, etc). These individuals also have birth years, death
               years, birthplaces, and death places associated with them, where this data is known.
               Filtering allows us to look at a series of maps and compare them easily. Figure 3
               shows the linked birth and death places of aristocrats in the French Enlightenment
               Network.
            
               Linked Birth and Death Places of Members of the French Enlightenment Network
                  Filtered (Aristocracy)
               
            
            In order to filter data, a third column should include the categories of places to be
               visualized; in this case, the birth places can be filtered by the gender of the
               participants in the French Enlightenment or by their participation in other networks
               like academies and salons. By comparing maps filtered by category or
               timeline/timespan, we can look for patterns in subsets of the data.
            In Figure 4, the linked birth and death places are displayed on a map alongside a
               timeline of death years as a bar chart. The timeline can be opened or closed with the
               arrows on the right side. It can also be deleted by clicking on the red icon of a
               garbage can.
            
               Linked Birth and Death Places of Members of the French Enlightenment Network
                  with Timeline by Gender
               
            
            In this diagram, the data points are grouped by gender. The light grey bars represent
               the number of women’s deaths in that year and the dark grey bars represent men’s
               deaths in that year. As we can see, there are many more men in the dataset who died
               in all years, and sometimes no women, yet the women who do appear in the dataset were
               more likely to die in later years, and very few women died in the early part of the
               eighteenth century. This supports the idea of women becoming more important in
               correspondence networks later in the century. Within Palladio, the timeline can also
               be filtered by selecting part of the timeline. In that case, only some of the
               point-to-point trajectories will be seen on the map. The data can also be grouped by
               other categories like nationality and social networks so that we can compare the
               geographic and temporal distribution of those groups using the Time Line and the Map
               View together.
            The Map View with a Time Line has been one of the most popular combinations. The
               Sphaera project uses Palladio (among other tools) to investigate the process of emergence of new epistemic communities
               . They use the Map View with a Time Line to visualize
               the geotemporal distribution of the production of the
                  treatises in their corpus. Braude’s demo video Monte
                  Carlo arrival
                shows how to use Palladio’s point-to-point map and a
               timeline to create a video showing historical growth over time. A similar effect can
               be used by advancing the timeline and taking snapshots of the map or network and then
               labelling the images. The Map View has also been used by various projects to map data
               from the Early Modern Letters Online data; one example is Samuel
                  Hartlib’s social relationships on a map with a Time Line .
         

            Network Graphs
            The second type of data visualization to discuss is the Graph View, which is useful
               in the study of networked people or things. A network can link people, places, books,
               or any other entities that are connected to one another. People or groups are
               commonly nodes in graphs of social networks. Network graphs are helpful in seeing
               connections between people or groups. They also aid in understanding how groups are
               structured. A network graph is a set of points (called nodes), connected by links
               (called edges). There exist related software packages for network analysis — notably
               Gephi, a computer program designed for the quantitative study of networks that is a
               more customizable version of the network function in Palladio. Palladio's network
               feature has been used to map the movement of Chinese immigrants from the village of
               their origin to destinations in Canada, mostly on the West Coast, recorded between
               1886 and 1949 . Zhang and Cho found that there was a
               clustering effect where immigrants to a particular destination were more likely to
               come from the same villages in China. That said, Palladio does not allow for the
               computation of clustering coefficients or other analytics that would work at a larger
               scale to draw out such relations in a larger dataset.
            For this demo, I choose Graph from the top menu. Figure 5 shows the academy
               affiliations of members of the French Enlightenment Network with the knowledge
               networks of academy members. Each edge shows a knowledge network that is present in
               an academy. The nodes are sized according to the number of members of the academy or
               knowledge network. The edges represent knowledge networks that share members of
               academies — in other words, this network graph shows the interrelation of
                  fields and academies, not just the disciplines which are represented in the
               academies but all of the major interests of academy members, including those that are
               not represented in the academies.
            
               Network of Academy Affiliations and Knowledge Networks
               
            
            Finally, the network graph can be downloaded as an SVG file to further customize the
               vector graphics or to integrate the vector graphics into another visual document. The
               simple design of the Graph View highlights Palladio’s modern sense of design and a
               lack of scientific complexity, which can be refreshing from a design standpoint but,
               perhaps, frustrating if taken from the standpoint of a scientific researcher seeking
               to encode the maximum amount of information into the data, rather than make a clear
               and comprehensible diagram which follows modern design aesthetics.
         

            Tables
            A third data visualization, the Table View, is used for creating lists and reordering
               data according to various categories. This function is available in spreadsheet
               software like Excel, Google Sheets, or OpenRefine, but the tables function in
               Palladio is easier to use and does not require the use of formulas or macros. The
               data table can also contain more than one column that is rearranged according to the
               categories in the first column. Finally, the data table can be filtered easily.
            
               Table of Academies and People by Knowledge Network
               
            
            The first step to creating a table in Palladio is to choose a row dimension. The row
               dimension provides the categories according to which the rest of the data table will
               be re-sorted. If the underlying data have multiple values in the same cell and have
               been split, the row categories will reflect that. The example in Figure 6 shows for
               the French Enlightenment Network the knowledge network categories (i.e.
               Sciences_Natural, Sciences_Medicine, Letters, Letters_Literary, etc) split by a
               semi-colon delimiter to create a total of 12 rows. The next step is to choose the
               category, or categories, for the other column dimensions; here I have chosen
               academies (which were split by a delimiter) and full names, reversed (which were
               not). While these same functions can be performed in Excel, adding and removing
               dimensions is quick and easy in Palladio, once the data are loaded. The primary
               purpose of the tables function is to examine the data up close. Having found patterns
               in the map or graph windows, such as connections between two places on a map or
               between a field of study or an academy on a network graph, we can easily see which
               people or entities are implicated in the table function. In fact, using filters, we
               can even examine simultaneously the connection between people, academies, and
               places.
            
               Table of Academies and People by Knowledge Network, Filtered by Paris as Birth
                  Place
               
            
            Tables can be filtered by categories, timespan, or timeline to dig deeper into the
               data. Let’s look at filtering by categories, since that is the most flexible way of
               filtering. In this case, we already know who was associated with particular knowledge
               networks and of which academies they were members. If we want to know which of those
               people were Parisians, we can simply filter the data table to find only the people
               who were born in Paris, who died in Paris, or both (Figure 7); this is possible
               because the underlying data already contains that information. If we noticed
               interesting patterns in where individuals were born, we could reverse this process
               and sort the table according to the row dimension Birth Place, and then add
               knowledge networks and academies as additional dimensions to see lists of the
               academies and knowledge networks associated with those places. Moving between tables
               and maps and graphs allows researchers to see the larger picture and dive deeper into
               the data without using multiple tools, yet the ability to look at subsets of the data
               is more limited than in tools like OpenRefine, or, indeed, Microsoft Excel.
         

            Galleries
            The fourth kind of visualization which can be produced in Palladio is the
                  Gallery, or an array of thumbnails. Galleries are filterable and are
               particularly useful for large collections of images where the visual aspects of the
               image are important enough to make comparing thumbnail versions of the images
               productive. Each record must contain the URL of an image which is openly on the
               internet on sites like Wikimedia, Imgur, or Google Images. The links can be to images
               on multiple sites, but the images must be publicly hosted; it is not possible to link
               to private or paywalled repositories like Artstor. It is possible to designate a
               column as containing the title and subtitle for each image and another as containing
               the URL linking the image. 
            
               Gallery of Members of the French Enlightenment Network
               
            
            In Figure 8, the image links are Wikimedia image URLs for portraits of historical
               individuals, the URLs are Wikipedia for biographies, the full name (reversed) is
               designated as the title, and the subtitle is the person’s occupation from the
               Electronic Enlightenment data.
            Galleries can be quickly filtered so that only the images associated with a specific
               value in another column will be shown; for instance, by gender or professional
               network. They can also be filtered by timeline or timespan.
            
               Gallery of Members of the French Enlightenment Network with Filtered
                  Timespan
               
            
            Figure 9 shows the same gallery with a timespan filter and social networks as the
               subtitle. The Timespan filter has three different layouts: bars, parallel, or grouped
               bars. Filtering by timespan requires start and end dates. It is also possible to
               choose a data column to group the bars and a tooltip label. The timespan can be
               filtered by clicking and holding to select a portion of the timespan, and only the
               entities whose timelines appear within that span will be displayed in the gallery.
               While the galleries are not very different from the tables insofar as they primarily
               show lists of entities which can be filtered, tables allow for easier reorganization
               of data and galleries foreground the visual element. Galleries do have additional
               uses in art history, architecture, film studies, and other disciplines where large
               numbers of images may be associated with dates or other time stamps and being able to
               filter those images by category or time could bring additional insight.
         

            Conclusions
            As quintessential middleware for digital historians and literary/cultural
               historians, Palladio is ideal for producing static maps and network diagrams
               sequentially to explore data, especially when time and geography are important
               elements of the dataset. The ability in Palladio to toggle between different types of
               visualizations without re-importing the dataset is a benefit for prototyping diagrams
               and moving between the visualization and the data. The option to filter data and
               split multiple values means that many different data structures can be used, and the
               same dataset can produce many different types of diagrams. The static diagrams
               produced in Palladio can be used in publications, since high resolution screenshots
               can meet standards for publication. The SVG and TXT files can also be downloaded for
               further processing and incorporation into more elaborate graphics in programs like
               Adobe Illustrator. The same diagrams can be produced with different color and
               contrast settings, although the land and streets greyscale base maps do
               not have high enough contrast to be legible when projected; the full-color
                  Buildings and Areas,
               Terrain, or Satellite maps are usually better for presentations.
               Similar issues may arise with diagrams produced in the other tools, since they are
               optimized for greyscale publication and the contrast may need to be increased or
               color introduced in order to make projected diagrams visible. This emphasis on maps
               and time is a strength when projects have a strong geospatial element but can be a
               weakness when geospatial patterns are less relevant to the matter at hand.
            Finally, Palladio is useful in teaching because the data and formatting are easily
               shareable. It can also be used when teaching how to create visualizations and how to
               use visualization to explore data, as Joel Blecher has shown in his pedagogical
               article on using Palladio, along with RAW graphs, in group work in a class on the
               transmitters of early Islamic law . The ability to
               download a formatted JSON file and share that with other researchers or students
               means that others can import pre-verified data — for example, a map which already has
               the coordinates selected and visualized or a gallery which already has the filters
               applied. Because the formatting is included in the JSON file, the person receiving
               the file, whether a student or a researcher, can open the file where the previous
               researcher left off and see what that person saw. Any changes to the formatting can
               be saved by the second person and sent back as a JSON file to the first person. This
               makes Palladio an ideal tool for experimentation by students for creating different
               diagrams, especially when there is not class time to create and verify an original
               dataset. Students can use the same dataset, or a selection of pre-verified datasets,
               and still save their work. A student who has created her own dataset can also share
               it with the class or instructor, and others can see both the visualizations and the
               underlying data.
            While Palladio is a very flexible tool, it does have some inherent limitations, most
               of which come from the fact that it is highly useable. Data cannot be edited within
               Palladio. In practice, this often means creating a dataset, importing it into
               Palladio, visualizing it, and then discovering errors — such as typos which cause the
               value to appear twice in a network diagram or differing coordinates for the same
               place — only to have to restart the process to correct the data. This limitation
               means that Palladio is very useful for creating many diagrams quickly with a verified
               dataset — or, indeed, finding problems or outliers in a dataset — but Palladio is
               consequentially most useful at the exploratory phase. As one gets to know the dataset
               better and finds patterns that are worth visualizing, it may become apparent that a
               more complex visualization is necessary to show patterns that appear within filtered
               maps or network graphs. One way to show such patterns in publication is small
               multiples, or small diagrams with variations in what is presented, displayed
               side-by-side. If small multiples are insufficiently complicated, more sophisticated
               diagrams may be necessary. In order to create complex network diagrams or interactive
               maps, the researcher will have to use tools that are more customizable and have more
               options for visualization and design than Palladio. 
            Palladio is most useful at the exploratory stages of a project, for teaching, and for
               collectively working through visualization problems, and less so in the latter stages
               of a complex project. The core assumption of the technology is that information
               visualization is primarily a process of designing visualizations that make historical
               arguments, rather than quantitative or scientific ones. The prioritization of moving
               between individual data points and their whole presumes enough familiarity with the
               underlying dataset that both the tabular information and the visualizations will make
               patterns apparent to the researcher rather than providing quantitative answers.
         
