Title:  Towards a Conceptual Framework for the Digital Humanities
Volume:  006
Issue:  2
Date:  31 July 2012
Abstract:  
            The concept of a great scientific domain broadens what is normally considered to be
               within the purview of science while identifying four such domains – the physical,
               life, social and computing sciences – and suggesting that the humanities naturally
               fit within the sciences as part of an expanded social domain. The relational
               architecture that has been developed to aid in understanding disciplinary
               combinations across great scientific domains then guides an exploration of the
               structure and content of the digital humanities in terms of a space of relationships
               between computing and the humanities.
         
Full Body Text: 
Towards a Conceptual Framework for the Digital Humanities

            Introduction
            For roughly a decade (1998–2007) I led new directions activities at the University of
               Southern California’s Information Sciences Institute across the domain of computing
               and its interactions with engineering, medicine, business, and the arts &
               sciences. Reflections on this extended multidisciplinary experience have led to the
               articulation of a new perspective on the nature and structure of computing as a
               scientific discipline 
               
               
               
               . In the process has come: a new conception of what a
                  great scientific domain is; the realization that computing forms the
               fourth such domain, with the physical, life, and social sciences comprising the other
               three domains; the recognition that much of the core content and future of computing
               is inherently multidisciplinary; the understanding that this multidisciplinarity can
               be reduced to a small fixed set of across-domain relationships, defining the
                  relational architecture; the demonstration that the relational
               architecture yields a novel organizational framework over computing; and the
               application of this framework to illuminating some of the connections between
               computing and other scientific disciplines. It has also suggested several tentative
               conclusions concerning disciplines outside of computing, such as that mathematics and
               the humanities can both be considered as part of the scientific enterprise, but that
               neither amounts to a great scientific domain on its own. Mathematics instead nestles
               naturally within a broad understanding of the computing domain, while the humanities
               fit within a comparably broad understanding of the social domain.
            The purpose of this article is to further explore these notions with respect to the
               emerging area of the digital humanities, with their focus on the
               interchange between computing and the humanities. In particular, we will look at the
               idea that the humanities can be viewed as a part of science — in fact, as part of the
               social domain — and at the framework that this yields for understanding the space of
               relationships between computing and the humanities. Such an exploration requires some
               understanding of computing, the humanities, and the philosophy of science. I am a
               professional within the first of these, but no more than an interested amateur with
               respect to the latter two. So there are inherent risks in this enterprise, but the
               hope is that the utility of its results will overbalance any naiveté exposed in the
               process.
         

            The Humanities as Social Science
            As I have been reflecting on computing, and following the resulting implications
               where they lead, I have come to accept the notion that any enterprise that
                  tends to increase our understanding of the world over time should be
               considered as essentially scientific, and thus part of science. This is more akin to
               Lakatos’s concept of a progressive research programme
                than to Popper’s focus on falsifiability
               , although not limited by Lakatos’s conception of the
               necessary role of correct predictions in establishing progressiveness. The ability to
               make correct predictions provides one means of assessing whether the world is better
               understood over time, but it need not be the only way. For example, development of a
               simple theory whose scope and predictions are comparable to those of a more complex
               extant theory may also provide an increase in understanding even without yielding
               additional correct predictions.
            On the flip side, it is important that a scientific enterprise also not tend to
               increase our misunderstanding over time. Fortune telling and religious prophecy can
               lead to correct predictions, particularly when ambiguity is combined with generous
               post-hoc interpretations and rationalizations, but neither has demonstrated any
               ability to predict better than random guessing. On the whole, they thus can
               contribute much more to misunderstanding than to understanding despite occasional
               hits. Such activities are clearly not scientific. But, while the difference is clear
               here, there can be grey areas where it is difficult to determine whether some
               activity tends to increase our understanding. Work on a normative scientific
                  method attempts to deal with this by prevalidating the approach taken to
               understanding. As long as the scientific method is used, what comes out of it will be
               science. The problem, of course, is that much of actual science does not proceed by
               such a method, and it would be greatly impoverished if it were forced to do so.
               Moreover, much trivial science follows the method to the letter.
            When I read a scientific article, what I care about is learning something new and
               important that I can be convinced is true (or at least plausible enough to be worth
               considering further). I am agnostic, at least in principle, concerning what methods
               were used to invent or discover the new thing, or what methods were used to convince
               me of their reality, as long as they achieve the desired ends. Great science requires
               all three of these attributes: novelty, importance and veracity. Good science makes
               some compromises. To many researchers, all that is important for good science is
               veracity, and work may be publishable with miniscule quantities of the other two
               attributes as long as there is sufficient evidence of — or methodology for
               establishing — truth. In contrast, I often learn more from sufficiently novel and
               important conjectures — even before there is a great deal of evidence or methodology
               in their favor — leaving me more comfortable in labeling such papers as good science
               than traditional small-but-validated results. I don’t learn of necessary truth from
               such articles, but they may still revolutionize my way of thinking about a topic,
               opening up new possibilities and plausibilities never previously considered. This is
               a form of increase in understanding more akin to that emphasized by Kuhn in his work
               on scientific revolutions, and that is absolutely crucial to long-term progress in
               science .
            This distinction is actually reminiscent of an interchange in Austen’s (1818) Persuasion, between Anne Elliot and Mr. Elliot, concerning
               the nature of good company. The former prefers the company of clever,
                  well-informed people, who have a great deal of conversation, while the latter
               states that Good company requires only birth, education, and manners, and with
                  regard to education is not very nice. Mr. Elliot then goes on to state of
               Anne’s notion that that is not good company; that is the best. What is
                  best in both company and science is that which improves understanding,
               whether based on novel facts or new ways of thinking. The forms are of secondary
               importance at best.
            The scientific method provides a validated approach for developing insights, but it
               is not the only method, nor necessarily always the most appropriate method. For any
               particular domain, and any particular problem within that domain, there may be zero,
               one, or more methods applicable to them. If we define the strength of a
               method for a domain or problem as the degree of veracity it can guarantee for the
               results it generates, good science should in general be pursued via one from among
               the strongest applicable methods. Using weaker methods when stronger ones are
               available can be one of the hallmarks of bad science. We need to be careful though
               about what is meant by two methods being applicable to the same problem, and thus the
               circumstances under which a stronger method should necessarily dominate. If two
               methods can yield the same insights, and one provides more assurance with respect to
               these insights, then the two are applicable to the same problem and the stronger
               should be preferred. However, if the problems are nominally the same but the two
               methods provide different insights about it, then the weaker method may still be of
               value, and the problems they tackle are in an important sense different.
            The potential diversity of appropriate methods, both within and across domains, does
               suggest a form of methodological pluralism in which multiple methods may
               be necessary to increase our understanding of individual domains, and those methods
               that are strongest in one domain, or on one problem, may not necessarily be
               strongest, or even applicable, in other domains or to other problems. Yet this need
               not, and should not, go anywhere near as far as Feyerabend’s epistemological
                  anarchy, with its denial of preeminence for any particular methods and its
               notion that conventional science is just one among many ideologies . All else being equal, the strongest among the
               applicable methods should always be the most appropriate.
            Domains can be ranked by the strength of the methods they are able to effectively
               use, with the physical sciences traditionally able to use stronger methods than the
               life sciences and the life sciences stronger methods than the social sciences. But
               this should not be confused with a claim that this hierarchy correlates with the
               quality of the science pursued within the domain. We have the need to understand all
               of these domains, and good science is equally possible within each, based on the
               strongest methods available for them. The methods used within the humanities,
               although generally even weaker than those standard in the social sciences, can be
               applied to increase our understanding within their domain, while stronger methods
               have so far not proven so successful. They thus can potentially serve as the basis
               for good science. Still, it is worth noting that even good science can be relatively
               unproductive if the best available methods are insufficient to increase our
               understanding of it to any significant extent.
            The notion that the term science is appropriate for all human intellectual
               endeavors that meet the criterion of tending to increase our understanding over time
               can, to some extent, be viewed as a return to the original notion of philosophy, or
                  love of wisdom, from which modern science descended through the
               splintering off of natural philosophy. But whether the generic is called philosophy,
               or science, or even Wissenschaft — a German word for science that
               includes not only those academic disciplines typically labeled as science in English
               but also other areas of academic study, such as the humanities  — the key point is to consider how our understanding is
               increased across the full range of subjects of interest, along with the methods best
               able to increase this understanding.
            The notion of a great scientific domain actually goes beyond even this broad notion
               of understanding, to also include shaping. Understanding involves a flow
               of influence from the domain of interest to a scientist, altering how the scientist
               views the domain. Shaping is a creative activity that goes in the reverse direction,
               with influence flowing from the scientist to the domain, resulting in alterations to
               the domain itself. Shaping may more conventionally be thought of as engineering, but
               traditional engineering only tends to focus on mathematically oriented shaping of the
               physical domain. Many other traditional professional activities — such as law,
               business, education, and medicine — are shaping activities as well, but in the social
               or life domains. In computing, it can be very difficult to separate understanding
               from shaping because most of what is to be understood has first been shaped, and in
               fact created, by people. However, the same kinds of issues will become continually
               more important in the future of the other domains as we are increasingly able to
               create and modify physical, life, and social entities at their most basic levels.
            Interestingly, the humanities are already very much like computing along this
               dimension, in that they primarily study human-created artifacts. In Simon’s terms,
               both computing and the humanities are sciences of the artificial
                  ; although even the distinction between natural
               and artificial is unlikely to remain tenable in any fundamental sense as we
               increasingly understand people as part of nature rather than as special beings
               outside of it, and as our increasing power to shape all kinds of entities further
               blurs the lines between what does and does not involve human intervention. With
               understanding and shaping being two sides of the same coin, and with them being
               (increasingly) intertwined across all scientific domains, I have been arguing that
               the top-level decomposition in science should focus on divisions by subject matter
               into great scientific domains, rather than on science (understanding) versus
               engineering (shaping) or artificial versus natural. The latter distinctions can then
               be appealed to as useful only via second-order within-domain organizational
               principles.
            Broadly, a great scientific domain concerns the understanding and shaping of
                  the interactions among a coherent, distinctive, and extensive body of structures
                  and processes. Each such domain is then characterized by its distinctive
               structures and processes. Structures are things of interest in a scientific domain,
               while processes actively alter these structures over time. The physical sciences
               focus on (non-living) matter and energy, and their associated forces. The life
               sciences focus on living beings and the processes by which they live, die, and
               reproduce. The social sciences focus on humans, their products, and their cognitive
               and social processes. The computing sciences focus on information and its
               transformation. In physics (physical sciences) we might, for example, talk about
               particles and forces; in cell biology (life sciences), the focus may be on cells plus
               how they originate, operate, and die; in cognitive psychology (social sciences), the
               concern might be with the human mind and how it yields intelligent behavior; and in
               compilers (computing science), the interest may be in programs and how they get
               translated into executable form.
            It is the dynamic richness and vitality of the interactions among an extensive body
               of structures and processes that leads to great scientific domains. It is also what
               drives the need for experimentation across much of the sciences. It isn’t that
               science itself inherently requires experimentation, but that complex interactions
               among structures and processes can severely limit the effectiveness of the analytical
               methods that can be so useful in less dynamic domains. Mathematics, for example,
               focuses almost exclusively on structures — equations, theorems, proofs, etc. — and is
               thus able to make great strides without resorting to experiments. However, its
               resulting lack of processes and their interactions with structures make it a
                  static domain that does not reach the level of a great scientific
               domain on its own. Because mathematical structures are informational in nature —
               rather than physical, biological, or social — it makes sense to consider it as part
               of the great scientific domain of computing, with its broader focus on information
               (structures) and its transformation (processes). According to this view, mathematics
               is a part of theoretical computing that uses one of the strongest methods known —
               proof — in understanding specific types of informational structures. The computing
               domain as a whole broadens this to cover the understanding and shaping of the full
               set of dynamic interactions possible among all kinds of informational structures and
               transformational processes. Altogether, this domain comprises not just computer
               science and mathematics, but also computer engineering, computational science,
               informatics, and information theory, science, and technology.
            The story for the humanities is analogous to that for mathematics. The humanities are
               full of structures — books, paintings, statues, etc. — and analyses of such
               structures, but there is, in general, little process to interact with these
               structures. There are some limited exceptions to this, such as: disciplines like
               history for which there is significant ambiguity as to whether they belong to the
               humanities or the social sciences; and linguistics, whose informational aspect
               implies an overlap with the domain of computing. However, aside from these
               multidisciplinary outliers, the predominant lack of processes in the humanities
               deprives it of the dynamic richness that demands experimentation and enables a great
               scientific domain.
            This essentially static essence of the humanities has been noted before, such as in
                   where the artificial (shaped) nature of the
               humanities is also discussed. The key additional point here is that, where there is
               process in the humanities, it is principally human activity. When this is combined
               with the fact that the artifacts studied by the humanities tend themselves to be
               about people, it ought to be clear why it is natural to consider them as part of the
               social sciences, when broadly construed as the great scientific domain that deals
               with (non-biological) human structures and processes. The humanities become a mostly
               static component of this domain focused on structures that help to reveal the
               essential human condition, but span both the understanding of such structures and
               their shaping (i.e., their creation). The close relationship between the humanities
               and social sciences is already recognized implicitly in universities that combine the
               two into colleges of humanities and social sciences, and in disciplines such as
               history that are ambiguous about where they belong, but the suggestion here involves
               an even tighter coupling, at least conceptually. 
            The political problem with such a merger is, of course, that stronger methods tend to
               drive out weaker ones that strive to coexist in the same environment. Even in
               subdomains where the stronger methods are not applicable, their presence in the same
               intellectual environment can sap the credibility of the weaker ones. Computer science
               grew out of mathematics in a number of universities, but had to separate itself, at
               least in part, to have the freedom to perform experiments, a method that although
               weaker than proof is essential in studying much of computing. The analytical and
               critical methods of the humanities are weaker than those used in the more traditional
               sciences, or even than those used in the rest of the social sciences, but they are
               presumably particularly attuned to their subdomain of the social sciences, and can
               thus still be valuable to the extent that they remain among the strongest methods
               available for increasing our understanding of important aspects of people and their
               culture. Even acknowledging this political problem, though, shouldn’t keep us from an
               awareness of the true conceptual connection that exists between the humanities and
               the social sciences, or of the understanding that this connection is possible without
               diminishing either participant.
         

            A Relational Analysis of the Digital Humanities
            The relational architecture provides a means of analyzing scientific topics and
               disciplines in terms of the great scientific domains they involve and the
               relationships among these domains that are implicated. It also provides a vehicle for
               systematically investigating the space of interdisciplinary overlaps that can occur
               among domains. In this article, the focus is on analyzing the digital humanities in
               terms of the potential space of overlaps the architecture identifies between
               computing and the humanities. In computing, architectures often induce languages, and
               the relational architecture is no exception. The Metascience Expression (ME)
                  language was developed to enable concise semi-formal representations of
               complex, particularly multidisciplinary, scientific disciplines and topics, in
               service of understanding them both individually and in aggregate. Expressions in ME
               are provided in the remainder of this discussion in conjunction with explanations in
               English.
            At the top level of the relational architecture, the four great scientific domains
               are denoted by their initial letters: P(hysical), L(ife), S(ocial), and C(omputing).
               The discipline of digital humanities then concerns the relationships between two of
               these domains: the social sciences (S) and the computing sciences (C). If the
               addition symbol (+) is used to denote that there is some form of relationship between
               two domains, we can express the digital humanities as S+C. However, we can also
               introduce a new initial for the H(umanities) — with H understood to be a subdomain of
               S (H ⊂ S) — to specialize the overall expression more particularly for the digital
               humanities to H+C.
            The relational architecture further partitions the generic notion of across-domain
               relationships (+) into two general types: implementation (/) and
                  interaction (↔). Together, these two types of relationships have
               proven adequate for understanding the multidisciplinary aspects of computing so far
               investigated, and have even proven useful in illuminating many aspects of computing
               not traditionally considered multidisciplinary.
            An implementation relationship (/) exists between two domains when multiple
               structures and processes in one domain combine to bring into being elementary
               structures and processes in the other. The physical domain implements the life domain
               (L/P) when molecules and their forces combine to yield cells and their processes.
               Similarly the life domain implements the social domain (S/L) when neurons in the
               brain combine with each other to implement thoughts in the mind, and the brain joins
               with the rest of the body to yield human behavior. Sometimes this general form of
               relationship yields a true or full implementation and at other times only a
                  simulation, where some definitional aspects of the implemented domain
               are missing. For example, a computational simulation of a person — a virtual
                  human (S/C) — may look and behave much like a real person, but cannot
               actually be one (at least as long as biological realization is part of the definition
               of a person). In other cases, it may be hard to differentiate whether something is
               real or simulated. Can, for example, the discipline of artificial intelligence
               produce real intelligence without biological realization or can it merely yield a
               computational simulation of intelligence? Disagreements continue over this question.
               Still, whether reality actually results, or merely a simulation is produced, either
               can be considered generically as an instance of implementation.
            The implementation relationship yields multiple flavors of digital humanities. When
               computing implements the humanities (H/C) we get digital cultural artifacts, such as
               digital paintings, sculptures in virtual environments, immersive experiences, and
               digital books. Given the dynamic nature of computing, we can expect an ever-larger
               fraction of the future of H/C to involve active rather than static artifacts, whether
               they are thought of as digital plays, videogames, or simply interactive experiences.
               Sometimes H/C artifacts are digital reproductions (simulations) of existing
               non-digital artifacts and at other times they are unique artifacts in their own
               right. But even a reproduction may itself be a true cultural artifact; a copy of a
               famous work of art may, for example, be a cultural artifact despite not being the
               original it appears to be. In addition, all computing artifacts can themselves be
               viewed as (implementing) cultural artifacts even if there was no such intention when
               they were constructed. The area of critical code studies, for example,
               views conventional computer programs as cultural artifacts, and applies the
               humanities’ analytical methods to aid in deriving a more complete contextual
               understanding of them  The implementation of the
               humanities by computing also yields computational linguistics, where computers
               implement and simulate human language processing. 
            In the other direction, the largely static nature of the humanities means that it
               cannot generally yield a full implementation of computing (C/H) — a book or a
               painting simply cannot compute all by itself — although special classes of dynamic
               cultural artifacts, such as complex mobiles, could conceivably be made to compute,
               and thus to provide a full implementation. What a book or a painting can do is
               provide a depiction or representation of a computer, essentially yielding a limited
               form of static simulation. In addition, if we extend the notion of the digital
               humanities from the overlap between computers (i.e., hardware and software) and the
               humanities, to the overlap between computing (as a great scientific domain) and the
               humanities, then the representation of information in general by cultural artifacts —
               which is also denoted as C/H — could be absorbed within the digital humanities.
               However, a broader appeal to the dynamics of the great scientific domain of the
               social sciences — within which the humanities exist as a static subdomain — is
               necessary more generally to fully implement computing. For example, a Wizard of Oz experiment involves a person acting as a
               computer (C/S) in a situation in which a computer is either not available or would be
               more trouble to program for the situation than it is worth. In such a circumstance,
               the person is simulating a standard electronic computer — that is, a computer
               implemented by the physical sciences (C/P) — but simultaneously socially implementing
               an actual computer (C/S).
            Interaction involves a peer relationship between two domains. For example, in human
               computer interaction (S↔C), there is a bidirectional flow of information and
               influence between entities from the social and computing domains. However, the
               relationship can in general either be bidirectional, as in this example, or
               unidirectional. Computational sensing, for example, involves flow of information from
               the physical world to a computer (P→C), while robotic manufacturing involves flow of
               influence from the computer to the physical world (P←C). In the digital humanities,
               flow from the humanities to computing represents the automated computational analysis
               of cultural artifacts (H→C); for example, determining clustering of authors based on
               their literary styles . It could even be considered to
               include recent work on machine reading, where computers automatically extract meaning
               from text . In the reverse direction, a flow from
               computing to the humanities represents computational composition (C→H). This is an
               area still in its infancy, but that already includes, for example, computational
               composition of simple poems , stories  and drawings ; and is likely
               to eventually include novels, plays, movies and interactive experiences.
            These two directions of interaction can loosely be considered as representing
               computational understanding of the humanities (H→C) and computational shaping of the
               humanities (C→H). In both cases, it is the computing domain that must be the active
               partner in the interaction because of the static nature of the content of the
               humanities. However, one way to remove this limitation is to shift the focus from the
               static structures of the humanities to those active scholars and scientists who study
               it. In the relational architecture, scientists are typically represented as members
               of the social domain (i.e., people) who internally represent and simulate part of
               their domain. For the humanities, this yields H/S. We can then represent the analysis
               of computing artifacts by humanities scholars, as is for example studied in critical
               code studies, by C→H/S. However, if the scientist is an expert in the combination of
               the humanities and computing — denoted as (C↔H)/S — such studies should actually be
               denoted as C→(C↔H)/S instead. Either way, this is a compound relationship involving
               both implementation and interaction. It also includes the full social domain, to
               represent the scientist, in addition to the humanities and computing.
            Other complex variants of the digital humanities can also be represented in an
               analogous manner. For example, human-computer collaboration in understanding the
               humanities becomes H→H/(C↔S), signifying analysis of the humanities (H→) by a
               human-computer entity (C↔S) with expertise in the humanities: H/(C↔S). Similarly,
               more traditional forms of informatics within the humanities — where the computer
               serves as a tool for use by the scientist rather than as a full scientific partner —
               become H→(C↔H/S), where the humanities expertise is now limited to the human
               participant. These relationships can also go in the reverse direction for shaping, or
               be bidirectional to represent the interplay between understanding and shaping. But
               either way, they involve two forms of interaction between computing and the
               humanities: the interaction of computing with the humanities researcher and the
               interaction of this pair with the humanities subject matter.
            Linguistics provides an interesting special case. It is a core topic within the
               humanities, and obviously has a tight coupling with sister disciplines such as
               literature, but language is inherently informational and its use is predominantly
               social. A natural expression for its subject matter would therefore be something like
               C/S↔C/S — denoting informational interactions among people. If, as discussed earlier,
               the purview of the digital humanities is expanded to include the full domain of
               computing — not just computers themselves but information and its transformation —
               then linguistics as a whole becomes a prime example of this broader notion of the
               digital humanities; or at least of computational social science, since the expression
               uses S rather than H.
            For comparison, and to help evaluate the relational approach to understanding the
               structure and scope of the digital humanities, it is informative to juxtapose it with
               the five major modes of engagement between computing and the humanities discussed by
               Svensson: information technology as
                     a tool, as a study object, as an expressive medium, as an experimental
                     laboratory and as an activist venue
                  . We can ask both whether these five modes fit
               naturally into the relational architecture and whether the architecture might
               indicate any significant areas missing from the list (while acknowledging that the
               list was unlikely to have been intended as comprehensive).
            To start, it does turn out that all five modes fit naturally within the architecture,
               although some yield more complex expressions than others. Computing as a tool used by
               humanities researchers maps directly onto the informatics example above: H→(C↔H/S).
               In this mode, the computer helps researchers acquire, manage, and analyze data about
               cultural artifacts. Computing as an object of study implicitly views it as
               (implementing) a cultural artifact: H/C. However, if we also want to explicitly
               represent that such an artifact is being analyzed by a humanities researcher, this
               expression can be extended to H/C→H/S. Computing as an expressive medium also takes
               the form H/C because cultural artifacts are being implemented on computers, although
               here we may want to expand this to H/C←H/S to emphasize the creative shaping aspect
               that is central to this mode. The difference between the computer as an artifact and
               the computer as a medium thus reduces to whether the focus is on understanding what
               already exists as a cultural artifact — even if not initially intended as such an
               artifact — versus deliberately creating new cultural artifacts. Computing as an
               experimental laboratory relates back to computing as a tool, and thus to informatics:
               H→(C↔H/S). However, instead of using computers as one-shot analysis tools,
               interactive exploratory analysis is supported in this mode. In contrast with
               traditional experimentation in active domains though, from what I can understand of
               the description of this mode, it really does seem to be more exploratory analysis
               than experimentation. Computing as an activist venue involves a shaping activity, but
               here the shaping is of society at large rather than merely the scientific domain of
               the humanities: S←(C↔H/S).
            Based on the relational architecture, the two most obvious topics missing from the
               list of five modes of engagement correspond to two simple relationships: C/H and C→H.
               With respect to the first, the earlier discussion of the static nature of the
               humanities implies that a full implementation of computing via the humanities is
               impossible, except for the limited special case of dynamic artifacts. However,
               cultural artifacts about computing — whether books, movies, or other forms — do fit
               naturally here, as would all cultural artifacts embodying information if the digital
               humanities were broadened to the full domain of computing. Any of these possibilities
               yields a sixth mode of engagement based on implementing or representing information
               and its transformation. The closest we have seen to C→H among the five modes
               discussed by Svensson is H/C→H/S, where a humanities researcher studies fragments of
               computing as cultural artifacts. The simpler expression can be considered as a more
               abstract characterization of this kind of activity, with the focus narrowed to just
               the relationship between the two primary domains involved. However, this simple
               expression can also denote computing actively shaping the humanities, harking back to
               automated composition — authoring, painting, etc. — by computers. As discussed
               earlier, this is an area still in its infancy, yet it is one that could grow to
               become a major component of the digital humanities.
            As a final comment on the digital humanities it is worth noting that while Svensson’s
               list is cast in terms of engagement with information technology — i.e., the more
               applied tool-building aspect of computing — computing as a great scientific domain is
               much more than just a set of tools. It is also theoretical results about information
               and its transformation, algorithms for transforming information, and a wealth of
               interdisciplinary topics involving interactions with one or more additional domains,
               from artificial intelligence (S/C) and robotics (L/(P↔C)) to automated construction
               (C→P), brain computer interfaces (L↔C), quantum and biological computers (C/P and
               C/L), online social networks (S↔C)* — where the star (*) represents interactions
               among arbitrary numbers of human-computer pairs — and the simulation, or possibly
               even implementation, of everything (Δ/C, where Δ denotes all domains). The set of
               possibilities opened up for the digital humanities by this broader perspective on
               computing, and in particular by domain combinations that go beyond H and C to include
               more complex relationships with additional domains, has yet to be tapped. We have
               seen a few examples already where it has been useful to bring in the full social
               domain (S), but it is not hard to conceive of further such topics, such as
               collaborative human-computer composition: (S↔C)→H. Combination with the physical
               domain leads to possibilities such as the computational analysis of both the content
               and physical embodiment — i.e., implementation by the physical domain — of cultural
               artifacts such as books, paintings and sculptures, yielding the expression H/P→C, or
               H/P→S/C if the analysis occurs via artificial intelligence. The relational
               architecture cannot all by itself identify where the interesting points are in this
               larger space, but it does provide a systematic structure over the space, while also
               guiding us towards an initial population of this structure.
         

            Conclusion
            The focus of this article has been on using the concept of a great scientific domain
               to understand the humanities as a subdomain of the social sciences, without
               diminishing either in the process, and then exploring the nature and structure of the
               digital humanities via the space of possible multidisciplinary relationships afforded
               by the relational architecture between the humanities and computing. The result is
               hopefully a better understanding of both the humanities and computing, and in
               particular of their overlap in the context of the digital humanities.
         
