Title:  Raiders of the Lost Corpus
Volume:  010
Issue:  2
Date:  7 June 2016
Abstract:  
                
                Coptic represents the last phase of the Egyptian language and is pivotal for a
                    wide range of disciplines, such as linguistics, biblical studies, the history of
                    Christianity, Egyptology, and ancient history. It was also essential for
                        cracking the code of the Egyptian hieroglyphs. Although digital
                    humanities has been hailed as distinctly interdisciplinary, enabling new forms
                    of knowledge by combining multiple forms of disciplinary investigation,
                    technical obtacles exist for creating a resource useful to both linguists and
                    historians, for example. The nature of the language (outside of the
                    Indo-European family) also requires its own approach. This paper will present
                    some of the challenges -- both digital and material -- in creating an online,
                    open source platform with a database and tools for digital research in Coptic.
                    It will also propose standards and methodologies to move forward through those
                    challenges. This paper should be of interest not only to scholars in Coptic but
                    also others working on what are traditionally considered more marginal
                    language groups in the pre-modern world, and researchers working with corpora
                    that have been removed from their original ancient or medieval repositories and
                    fragmented or dispersed.
            
Full Body Text: 
The dry desert of Egypt has preserved for centuries the parchment and papyri that
                provide us with a glimpse into the economy, literature, religion, and daily life of
                ancient Egyptians. During the Roman period of Egyptian history, many texts were
                written in the Coptic language. Coptic is the last phase of the ancient Egyptian
                language family and is derived ultimately from the ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs of
                the pharaonic era. 
Digital and computational methods hold promise for research in the many disciplines
                that use Coptic literature as primary sources: biblical studies, church history,
                Egyptology, linguistics, to name a few. Yet few digital resources exist to enable
                such research. This essay outlines the challenges to developing a digital corpus of
                Coptic texts for interdisciplinary research — challenges that are both material
                (arising from the history and politics of the physical corpus itself) and
                theoretical (arising from recent efforts to digitize the corpus). We also sketch out
                some solutions and possibilities, which we are developing in our project Coptic
                SCRIPTORIUM. 
Digital Humanities has defined itself as a field that can enable research on a new
                scale, whether distant reading of large text corpora, aggregation of large visual
                media collections, or enabling discovery in future querying and algorithmic research
                    
                
                . Critical Digital Humanities scholars remind us that
                digitization initiatives sometimes replicate the Western canon rather than expand
                it, and that digitization is not in and of itself a more equitable mode of
                scholarship existing outside of politics 
                . Digital tools and corpora for Coptic language and
                literature, we argue, can expand humanistic research not merely in terms of scale
                but also scope, especially in ancient studies and literature. Large English, Greek,
                and Latin corpora — as well as the tools to create, curate, and query them — have
                been foundational for work in the Digital Humanities. Computational studies on the
                documents from late antique Egypt can facilitate academic inquiry across traditional
                disciplines as well as transform our canon of Digital Classics and Digital
                Humanities scholarship.

                Part I: Shenoute of Atripe and the Scriptorium of Doom
                Of the several dialects of Coptic that developed in late antiquity, the Sahidic
                    dialect is considered the early classical dialect. Much of the surviving Coptic
                    literature in Sahidic comes from one important late antique repository: the
                    White Monastery in Egypt. One of the most important Egyptian monasteries of the
                    fourth through 12th centuries, it is also known as
                    the Monastery of Shenoute, named after the monk who was the father, or abbot, of
                    the community from the 380s until his death in 465. During Shenoute’s life, the
                    large basilica (the community’s church building) was constructed; over the
                    centuries it was damaged, restored, and changed, but the basic design and
                    construction are from Shenoute’s tenure in the fifth century. 
                
                    Basilica of the White Monastery; photograph by Schroeder, 2012
                    

                
                This community is often called the White Monastery, because of the color of the
                    stone used to build the church. Some of the blocks used to construct the
                    basilica were taken from the nearby pagan temple of Repyt (Triphis). Shenoute is
                    the most famous and most important leader of this monastic community, propelling
                    it to a position as a political and cultural center in Upper Egypt.
                This monastery’s scriptorium and library were arguably the most influential in
                    the region. Important copies of biblical books and monastic texts written or
                    translated into Coptic have survived 
                    . Shenoute received letters from the bishop of
                    Alexandria, which were translated into Coptic and circulated throughout the
                    area. Shenoute himself is our most important and probably most rhetorically
                    sophisticated Coptic author . And he is
                    particularly known for his stark, prophetic rhetoric in which he condemns
                    sinners, heretics, and others for their failures and predicts the coming of
                    God’s wrath upon them 
                    . The White Monastery, therefore, is one of our most
                    important repositories of Coptic literary manuscripts, and its corpus provides
                    important insights into the religious history of Christian Egypt.
                For linguists and Egyptologists, Coptic’s significance lies in its position as
                    the last phase of the Egyptian language family. Egyptian evolved over thousands
                    of years from the third and fourth millennia BCE through the Byzantine era,
                    encompassing Old and Middle Egyptian hieroglyphs of the pharaonic periods as
                    well as Coptic. Because of this connection to ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs,
                    Egyptologists, including Jean-François Champollion, used their knowledge of
                    Coptic to translate the hieroglyphs after the discovery of the Rosetta Stone
                    (e.g., see ; ; ). Coptic is written primarily in the Greek
                    alphabet, with some modified Demotic characters. (Demotic is the Egyptian script
                    used increasingly during the Hellenistic period, and it preceded Coptic as a
                    written language in Egypt.) The language, therefore, could be loosely understood
                    by the non-specialist as a language of transliteration: Egyptian grammar and
                    vocabulary written primarily in the Greek alphabet (with some native Egyptian
                    letters-Demotic-included). Figure 3 is a transcription of the detail of the
                    Coptic manuscript in Figure 2. The letters rendered in red in Figure 4 derive
                    from the Demotic (Egyptian) alphabet. Some Greek (and to a lesser extent Latin)
                    vocabulary words were incorporated into the language, and after the Arab
                    conquest, some Arabic loanwords came into the language, as well. The Greek loan
                    word akathartos appears in blue in Figure 3. A
                    digital Coptic language corpus would be a resource for research by linguists and
                    Egyptologists alike.
                
                    Detail of manuscript K9662 from the Österreichische Nationalbibliothek,
                        Vienna, Papyrussammlung (Shenoute n.d.)
                    

                
                
                    Transcription of detail of ONB manuscript K9662; Demotic characters in
                        red, Greek word in blue.
                    

                

                Coptic is also important for Biblical studies, including extra-canonical texts.
                    Many biblical manuscripts survive in various Coptic dialects, including
                    important witnesses in Sahidic from the White Monastery. Shenoute of Atripe is
                    also one of our earliest Coptic authors to cite and quote the bible, providing
                    early evidence as to how the bible was used and interpreted in fourth and fifth
                    century Egypt. Some of our most important extra-canonical texts, including the
                    so-called Gnostic library from Nag Hammadi, survive in
                    Coptic. The Nag Hammadi corpus includes philosophical treatises but also a
                    number of extra-canonical Gospels, apocalypses, and other early Christian texts
                    that are fundamental to our understanding of Christian origins. The Gospel of
                    Thomas, shown in Figure 4, is one of the most famous of those texts.
                
                    Pages from the Nag Hammadi Library, containing the end of the Apocryphon
                        of John and beginning of the Gospel of Thomas; in the Coptic Museum, Cairo;
                        photograph by Schroeder 2002
                    

                
                Coptic literature documents the beginnings of the monastic movement, as well.
                    Egypt became one of the cradles of early Christian monasticism when in the
                    fourth century, men and women flocked to Egypt to become monks, and of course
                    Egyptian men and women themselves became monks. Perhaps the most famous of these
                    was Anthony the Great, who lived in a cave in the desert cliffs depicted in or
                    in the region of those depicted in Figure 5. Monastic settlements dotted the
                    Nile Valley from the fourth through eighth centuries.
                
                    Cliffs behind the monastery of Saint Anthony by the Red Sea; photograph by
                        Schroeder, 2008
                    

                
                 Thus, Coptic literature is an important primary source for multiple academic
                    disciplines, and we haven't even addressed social and economic history.
                    Countless documentary papyri and ostraca survive, some of which are beginning to
                    be digitized by scholars at http://papyri.info. Ostraca are pot sherds on which people wrote
                    letters, receipts, and other documents. We have thousands upon thousands of
                    Coptic ostraca, many of which are undocumented and unpublished, with more being
                    discovered all the time.
                The White Monastery is arguably the most important ancient repository for Coptic
                    texts in the Sahidic dialect and more generally for understanding early
                    Christian monasticism. The community remained a literary powerhouse through at
                    least the twelfth century, accumulating, transcribing, and storing a wide
                    variety of texts. Documents from Byzantine Egypt mention people sending requests
                    and even visiting this monastery’s library to obtain copies of various
                    documents. It contains the largest, earliest collection of contemporaneous,
                    non-hagiographical texts documenting a coenobitic monastery. We have letters,
                    monastic rules, treatises and discourses from Shenoute and at least his next two
                    successors, comprising a corpus larger than that of any other fourth or fifth
                    century monastery. These documents date to a period earlier than the Benedictine
                    material in Italy and Europe, and they comprise a less-hagiographical (and thus
                    more historical) source than more well-known documents about Egypt’s
                        desert fathers and desert mothers,
                    such as saints lives about famous monks, or the Sayings of
                        the Desert Fathers
                    
                    
                    
                    . When the monastery’s library was discovered
                    in modernity, its documents transformed the study of the Coptic language and
                    informed our understanding of the entire Egyptian language family .
            

                Part II: Coptic Egypt and the Last Crusade
                In the 18th and 19th centuries, when Europe colonized Egypt and Africa, Europe
                    discovered the White Monastery library. By this time, the monastery was barely
                    populated, and Arabic had taken over as the popular language of Egypt. Even the
                    Coptic liturgies and bibles were in Arabic, not Coptic. The Coptic manuscripts,
                    once part of the most important library in the region, were no longer legible to
                    the Egyptian people, and they were dispersed to libraries, museums, and private
                    collections elsewhere, primarily Europe.
                 The actual history of the dismemberment of the library is not completely known,
                    but we do know that in the 18th c., pieces of this library were on the
                    antiquities market. Whether taken by European traders or offered up by Egyptian
                    Christians at the monastery, we don’t know for sure. But our first record of
                    White Monastery manuscripts leaving Egypt for Europe is their acquisition by the
                    Borgias in Italy in 1778. Most of the last of the manuscripts were found by the
                    French scholar Gaston Maspero in a small room, essentially discarded by people
                    who no longer knew Coptic, and were taken to Paris .
                Today, the manuscripts are scattered across the globe. Only a handful remain in
                    Egypt. The largest collections are in Naples, Vienna, Paris, and England. The
                    map in Figure 6 shows only the locations of manuscripts of Shenoute’s writings.
                    Not where all the biblical texts are located, nor liturgical, hagiographical,
                    and other White Monastery texts. Including all the known White Monastery
                    manuscripts would add to the number of modern repositories on this map. Of
                    course, we do not know the number of documents (whether fragments or whole
                    codices) that exist in private collections.
                
                    Map of known locations of manuscripts of Shenoute's texts; data from
                        codicological reconstruction by Stephen Emmel (2004); map created by
                        Schroeder at http://goo.gl/c3uaM6
                    
                    

                
                The texts were dispersed page by page, not codex by codex. Thus, the pages of one
                    original codex might now be all over the globe. Figure 7 is a page from a copy
                    of Volume Three of Shenoute’s Canons for monks;
                    many other folios from his corpus are similarly damaged or fragmented. The chart
                    in Figure 8 illustrates the dispersal of the manuscripts of one text — not a
                    codex but one text — known as Abraham Our Father,
                    which is a letter to monks in Volume Three of Shenoute's Canons. Folios survive from a few copies of Canons vol. 3, so this pie chart represents pages from 6 separate
                    codices. Though six repositories are represented in the chart, each codex's
                    pages went to different repositories. And there are gaps; the text does not
                    survive in entirety even after piecing together all the surviving folios. 
                
                    Damaged folio from Volume 3 of Shenoute's Canons
                        for monks at the Bodleian Library, Oxford; photograph by Schroeder
                        2012
                    

                
                
                    Locations of known, extant folios of Abraham Our
                            Father
                    


                

                Less than 50% of Shenoute’s corpus survives. Of the entire library, the
                    percentage is probably similar, but we don’t know for sure.
            

                Part III: The Corpus Strikes Back
                One challenge with this level of corpus dismemberment is access: how can we
                    access these texts and understand them with both depth and breadth? What will it
                    require to develop and curate a Coptic corpus suitable for cross-disciplinary,
                    digital and computational research? Some of the challenges to developing a
                    cross-disciplinary digital Coptic research environment include:
                
                    Digitization and copyright
                    The patchwork nature of public domain editions
                    The need for field-wide standards for stable universal references for
                        documents
                    Integrating technologies for linguistic, historical, and codicological
                        research
                    The need for semi-permanent archives for corpora, akin to the Perseus
                        Digital Library
                
                Despite the situation of the manuscripts, the late nineteenth and early twentieth
                    centuries saw flurries in the publication of Coptic literary texts: biblical
                    texts, hagiography, liturgy, monastic texts, and others. Issues of access,
                    however, endure. Many texts remain unpublished in whole or in part, and even
                    more are untranslated. In the case of Shenoute’s writings, it was not even until
                    1993 that a scholar pieced together all the dispersed manuscripts in a
                    codicological reconstruction, enabling various scholars to read all the known
                    surviving pages of any one given text by our most important Coptic author
                    outside of the bible .
                Copyright and editorial issues also exist. The publication status of Coptic texts
                    is a patchwork, with some texts partially published and partially unpublished
                    due to the dispersal of their original manuscripts in multiple repositories.
                    Some publications are now in the public domain, while others are not. Often,
                    only one publication of any given manuscript exists. (And by manuscript, we
                    refer to the segmented pieces of codices, not entire codices.) Some older,
                    public domain editions are also regarded as problematic by current scholars.
                Scholars working in Greek and Latin face similar obstacles in digitizing sources,
                    in that many desirable editions are under copyright. However, in Classics, often
                    there are multiple published editions of any given text, with at least one of
                    them being in the public domain. The Perseus Digital Library (http://www.perseus.tufts.edu)
                    publishes online previous print, public domain editions. This model works for
                    Classical texts but is not sufficient for Coptic literature, because of the
                    different nature of the sources.
                Additionally, since the manuscripts themselves have been dismembered, scholars
                    cannot rely upon a given repository and community of librarians to digitize a
                    vital text. 
                 Going back to the original manuscripts for digitization is desirable for basic
                    reasons of scholarship and to provide a digital-native text that is not created
                    from published editions still under copyright. Digitizing the manuscript and
                    encoding all the line breaks, column breaks, page breaks, punctuation,
                    diacritics, and other markings enables the study of many aspects of the language
                    and literature. But it is also time consuming, especially when encoding texts
                    that have not been studied thoroughly, or perhaps have never been translated
                    into a modern language, or even published.
                Some existing digital Coptic resources include: 
                
                    Digital editions of documentary papyri and ostraca at http://papyri.info. Papyrologists are
                        beginning to expand this predominantly Greek collection into Coptic using
                        the EpiDoc subset of the Text Encoding Initiative XML standards  and the Unicode Coptic character set.
                    The Thesaurus Linguae Aegyptiae plans to expand into the Coptic dialects
                        at http://aaew.bbaw.de/tla/
                        (subscription required, free to scholars) 
                    The Corpus dei Manuscritti Copti Litterari project encodes Coptic text in
                        html, sgml, with legacy fonts at http://cmcl.aai.uni-hamburg.de/ (subscription required) 
                    A searchable Bible in the Unicode Coptic character set is in progress at
                            http://www.crosswire.org/study/fulllibrary.jsp?show=SahidicBible
                        .
                    Some Sahidic New Testament manuscripts at the New Testament Virtual
                        Manuscript Room, which concentrates on Greek at http://ntvmr.uni-muenster.de/
                        
                    The Marcion project (http://marcion.sourceforge.net/), established primarily to study
                        Gnostic texts from the Nag Hammadi Library, has searchable text and a
                        dictionary which are primarily accessible only through software that
                        requires installation on one’s computer.
                
                A few resources are available commercially. 
                The field currently has no generally accepted set of data curation standards for
                    metadata or textual data for Coptic literature. Stable, field-recognized
                    identifiers and digital citation methods for Coptic literature still do not
                    exist. As Joel Kalvesmaki has argued, canonical referencing is complex for text
                    collections with such complicated histories and provenance issues . The Trismegistos portal provides unique
                    identifiers for various ancient text-bearing objects, but more work remains to
                    be done . Existing publications do not even use a
                    common word segmentation practice for printing Coptic text. Only open,
                    collaborative work among various scholars and across digital Coptic projects
                    will ensure that each digital Coptic project does not develop its own unique
                    protocols and datasets that are not applicable for multiple research questions,
                    or that are not readable or transferrable across projects.
                Martin Mueller’s keynote lecture at the 2012 Chicago Colloquium on Digital
                    Humanities and Computer Science noted philology’s tendency toward perfectionism
                        . Philologists' resistance to releasing editions
                        too soon bumps up against the digital scholarly world’s impulses to
                    release data openly and swiftly, in order to increase access to texts. The
                    ability to edit and annotate a digital corpus resolves some of these anxieties,
                    provided that the technology of the environment for the corpus enables
                    revisions. An example of such a corpus is the Papyri.info site, where the
                    Papyrological Editor enables further edits and refinements. 
                The recent controversy over the so-called Gospel of Jesus’s
                        Wife Fragment demonstrates the necessity for an open, well-curated,
                    and annotated digital Coptic corpus. Harvard University announced the discovery
                    of a papyrus fragment containing a small portion of a Coptic literary text
                    containing the terms Mary,
                    Jesus, and my wife in September 2012, and a slew of media fanfare
                    followed, including a front-page story in the New York
                        Times
                    . The primary questions were: is this document an
                    authentic ancient text and does it provide evidence that Jesus was married —
                    possibly to Mary Magdalene? — or at least that a particular early Christian
                    group wrote about Jesus marrying Mary Magdalene ?
                    For two years, scholars debated the authenticity of the fragment, examining the
                    vocabulary, syntax, and handwriting. Similarities to vocabulary in the Nag
                    Hammadi Library were noted, although the grammar of the Coptic in the fragment
                    struck some scholars as inauthentic very early in controversy 
                    . And since the fragment appeared on a small piece of
                    papyrus, it seemed possible the text could be an amulet, spell, or prayer
                    fragment. 
                Immediately, the potential for analyzing the document against digital corpora
                    curated for Coptic’s particular language structure and annotated linguistically
                    became apparent. The lack of such corpora meant that only one scholar made such
                    an attempt, using a widely circulating digital version of the Sahidic New
                    Testament gospels and the Nag Hammadi Library’s Gospel of Thomas . These digitized texts, however, however, contain many
                    irregularities in spelling and word segmentation, and are not annotated. While
                    helpful, they could not be called well-curated nor comprehensive. Scholarly
                    debate over the authenticity of the fragment continued, focusing on traditional
                    methodologies of studying ink, papyrus, handwriting, and grammar, in blogs,
                    social media, and traditional scholarly outlets 
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    
                    . Finally Coptic scholar Christian Askeland determined
                    the text was indeed a modern forgery, since another document using the same ink
                    and written in the same hand was also forged. He published his results in a blog
                    post and later a traditional article . Traditional
                    scholarly methodologies informed this debate, but open access corpora and images
                    would have accelerated the findings and would have allowed for testing of
                    hypotheses speculated between 2012 and 2014. 
            

                Part IV: A New Hope
                A richly annotated corpus of digital Coptic literary texts in an open-access
                    environment, with well curated metadata, and which adheres to existing digital
                    and traditional field-based standards, enables the exploration of the
                    multidisciplinary research areas we have described. Such work requires tools to
                    process and annotate Coptic text, a search and visualization infrastructure, and
                    community-based standards. Coptic SCRIPTORIUM is developing such tools and
                    technologies, plus a digitized corpus created with these tools.
                To create a digital corpus of Coptic texts suitable to automated search and other
                    digital and computational methods, new technologies must be developed
                    specifically for processing the Coptic language, and existing technologies must
                    be adapted. Such technologies include:
                
                    Character converters to convert text visualized as
                        Coptic characters using legacy fonts into the Unicode Coptic character set.
                        Many scholars have existing digitized Coptic text on their computers, which
                        could contribute to a large collaborative corpus. But the transcriptions are
                        in legacy fonts, which need to be converted into Unicode (UTF-8)
                        characters.
                    A tokenizer to break up Coptic word groups into their
                        constituent, grammatical parts. The Coptic language is agglutinative. Words
                        are in fact bound groups of morphemes, each with its own grammatical
                        purpose. Figure 9 gives one example from the text, Abraham
                            Our Father, by Shenoute:
                
                
                    Example of a Coptic bound group of morphemes from Abraham Our Father
                    

                
                There is no universal, uniform method of word segmentation in Coptic; different
                    scholars have followed different guidelines. The emerging standard in the United
                    States is currently that of Bentley Layton, in his Coptic Grammar . In Germany, however, some scholars follow the
                    paradigm established by Walter Till . Tokenizing Coptic
                    is essential for linguistic study, since each morpheme needs its own
                    part-of-speech annotation. Historical research using basic vocabulary searches
                    also requires tokenization. Finally, more complex research into style and
                    rhetoric, authorship attribution of unidentified texts, and searching for text
                    reuse and quotation (especially using algorithms to search for biblical
                    citations) demand a tokenized text
                
                    A normalizer to standardize spelling of Coptic words
                        and remove or standardize diacritics and punctuation. Normalization of
                        spelling is essential for search, and often for further machine-enabled
                        annotation. Some tools to annotate the text automatically or
                        semi-automatically rely on consistent spelling of terms. Issues include
                        spelling variants due to geographical practices, scribal inconsistencies or
                        idiosyncrasies; expansion of scribal abbreviations for nomina sacra;
                        differing practices across manuscripts for diacritical marks such as
                        supralinear strokes or circumflexes. Figure 10 provides examples of
                        abbreviations to be expanded and diacritics removed:
                
                
                    Normalization examples
                    

                
                
                    TEI XML 
                        annotation standards, specifically the EpiDoc subset,
                        to markup the diplomatic transcription of texts and their metadata. Encoding
                        standards developed by the Text Encoding Initiative  and
                        especially the EpiDoc subset used by epigraphers and papyrologists  can be adapted for Coptic literary manuscripts.
                        Metadata and paleographical information can be encoded.
                
                Other existing, community standards used in both digital and print scholarship
                    can be adapted, as well. Trismegistos numbers from the Trismegistos database of
                    ancient texts and texts-bearing objects should be included in metadata to enable
                    linked data across digital projects . For works
                    specifically in Coptic, the CMCL abbreviations for manuscript codices (e.g.,
                    MONB.YA = White Monastery manuscript YA) and Clavis Coptica for authors and
                    texts are existing standards 
                    . For texts by Shenoute, the incipits and
                    abbreviations for texts developed by Stephen Emmel in Shenoute's Literary Corpus should be used for metadata . The field still needs a system for Uniform Resource
                    Names (URNs) and other more refined citation methods for curating digital data
                    and documents — especially given the dismembered nature of the corpus, and that
                    some pieces of the corpus may be published in born-digital formats while others
                    may be adapted from previously published editions.
                Tools to annotate or mark up the digitized, curated text enable search and
                    computational research methods for work in a variety of disciplines need to be
                    developed. We know of no other open source tools to annotate digital texts in
                    the Egyptian language family. SCRIPTORIUM is working on the following
                    technologies
                
                    A Part-of-Speech tagger automatically annotates
                        Coptic morphemes according to the linguistic conventions established in
                        Layton's Coptic Grammar (the field standard),
                        enabling research into linguistics and style. It uses the trainable
                        TreeTagger natural language processing tool .
                    A lemmatizer can automatically annotate various forms
                        of a word to the standard, dictionary headword. The lemmatizer will enable
                        linking data to online lexica either at SCRIPTORIUM or elsewhere on the
                        web.
                    A language-of-origin tagger automatically annotates
                        words of Greek, Hebrew, Latin, or other non-Egyptian language origin,
                        enabling research into loan words, language contact, and bilingualism. 
                    Entity taggers to annotate digital corpora for people and places to
                        connect literary data with linked open data initiatives such as PELAGIOS for
                        geographic locations in the ancient world and SNAP on ancient prosopography
                        are also desirable 
                        
                
                At Coptic SCRIPTORIUM textual annotations are made using multi-layer and standoff
                    markup 
                    , which can capture the variety of annotations:
                    linguistic, paleographic, philological, etc. The token layer is the base layer
                    of data, the smallest unit of data annotated, as seen in Figure 11, which shows
                    the annotation of two bound groups (one in red, one in blue), which translate
                    into of a son of Abraham:
                
                    Example of multilayer, standoff markup of Coptic text from Abraham Our Father
                    
                    

                
                The layers provide data for the morphemes, the bound group, the line number in
                    which the text appears in the original manuscript (lb, following the TEI/EpiDoc
                    standard), the column in which the text appears in the original manuscript (cb),
                    the page on which the text appears in the original manuscript (pb, in which
                    MONB.YA is the siglum for White Monastery codex YA as designated by the CMCL
                    standards), the normalized morphemes, and the part of speech tags for the
                    normalized morphemes (PREP=preposition, ART=article, N=noun, NPROP=proper
                    noun).
                 SCRIPTORIUM provides the means to search the multiple layers of data in various
                    combinations, including in conjunction with metadata. We use the open-source
                    search and visualization tool ANNIS . ANNIS contains
                    built-in visualization capabilities and can be customized for each corpus.
                    Coptic SCRIPTORIUM has embedded a Coptic keyboard, a web font for Coptic Unicode
                    characters, and various visualizations of the data. All the tools and corpora
                    discussed in this essay are available at http://www.copticscriptorium.org. 
                The multilayer architecture allows for multidisciplinary research . Historians may be interested in vocabulary searches
                    on the normalized words. Linguists may query the parts of speech for
                    computational morphological and syntactic research. Scholars working on ancient
                    prosopography or network analysis may search for named entities. Additional
                    layers may be added if other researchers wish to annotate the corpora for other
                    research questions. Since all data documents are licensed with Creative Commons
                    Attribution licenses, philologists and paleographers who wish to publish their
                    own digital editions of manuscripts may download, modify, and annotate or
                    re-annotate our XML documents for their own work as long as they provide
                    attribution to the source. 
                The community of Coptic scholars is small, but the impact of our work ripples out
                    into many fields. The true hope for digital scholarship in the Coptic language
                    and literature lies beyond our individual efforts and in the community of Coptic
                    scholars within and outside the academy: scholars who digitize texts, write
                    annotations, inspire and develop new technologies, conduct research using the
                    platform, and contribute to the evolving standards.
            
