Title:  Digital Humanities: On Finding the Proper Balance between
                    Qualitative and Quantitative Ways of Doing Research in the Humanities
Volume:  007
Issue:  3
Date:  19 December 2013
Abstract:  
                Are we currently confusing being connected with communicating - and does the sort
                    of communication people are typically engaging in on the Internet, in social
                    media and when they use their mobile phones merely lead to superficial rather
                    than meaningful dialogue? If this is the case, it ought to concern Digital
                    Humanities (DH) scholars, many of whom continue to be more interested in how we
                    connect than in the substance and dialogue of that very connectedness. I would
                    like to argue for a better balance between the how and the
                        what of DH - for a qualitative turn of sorts away from
                    an interest in gaining and making accessible more information only, to an
                    interest in also making sense of and understanding that information. For such a
                    turn, computer scientists need input from the humanities whose specialty has
                    always been to turn information into knowledge by means of critical
                    interpretation and contextualization.
            
Full Body Text: 
Are we currently confusing being connected with communicating - and does the sort of
                communication people are typically engaging in on the Internet, in social media and
                when they use their mobile phones merely lead to superficial rather than meaningful
                    dialogue? If this is the case, it ought to concern
                Digital Humanities (DH) scholars, many of whom continue to be more interested in how
                we connect than in the substance and dialogue of that very connectedness. I would
                like to argue for a better balance between the how and the
                    what of DH - for a qualitative turn of sorts away from an
                interest in gaining and making accessible more information only, to an
                interest in also making sense of and understanding that information.
                For such a turn, computer scientists need input from the humanities whose specialty
                has always been to turn information into knowledge by means of critical
                interpretation and contextualization.
The arguments made by Anne Burdick, Johanna Drucker, Peter Lunenfeld, Todd Presner
                and Jeffrey Schnapp in Digital_Humanities (2012) may
                serve as an illustration. For these authors, the core human values of DH are the
                digital enfranchisement of the public and the promotion of a core curriculum for
                undergraduates that will 
                    make them active participants and
                        stakeholders in the creation and preservation of cultural materials.
                    
                 In terms of humanities scholarship Burdick, et al. hope that the constant
                spread of information and knowledge across networks may give rise to 
                    a state of ubiquitous
                            scholarship, of ever-more interconnected, publicly engaged,
                        participant citizens.
                    
                 Again, the idea is to democratize, to reach out to broader publics and to
                have the university scholar work together with the citizen or amateur scholar. The
                    read-only ethos of the old humanities should be replaced
                with a read/write/rewrite ethos rooted in making - highlighting
                    the processes of design and the
                    creation of the experiential, the social, and the communal. Indeed, 
                    authorship is design and design is
                        authorship.
                    
                 The kind of scholarship that this results in is by definition, applied. It is scholarship that
                values the how over the what and that is
                much closer to what the Greek poet Archilochus, and later also Isaiah Berlin,
                referred to as fox knowledge rather than
                    hedgehog knowledge.
            
It is not, the authors of Digital_Humanities assure us,
                that deep, specialized knowledge of the kind that humanities scholars used to be
                fond of and excel at - hedgehog knowledge - is useless. It is just that 
                    there can be little doubt that the
                        technologies that give rise to the Digital Humanities push us - scholars,
                        students, and citizens alike - into the fox family. The nature of discourse
                        and debate in networks, the reality of study in multimedia environments, and
                        the inexorable splintering of attention that multiple windows and channels
                        afford lead to pursuing many ends.
                    
                 If at all possible, we should not give up - at least not yet and not entirely
                - on that inner hedgehog but instead try to create
                    hedgefoxes: hybrid creatures who combine the hedgehog’s
                ability to go deep with the fox’s wide-ranging curiosity.
            
Toward the very end of Digital_Humanities, however, we
                are told that: 
                    The prevailing research culture of the
                        Digital Humanities will become entrepreneurial, much like design or certain
                        areas of contemporary engineering and the sciences are… The digital
                        humanist’s sense of identity will be less anchored in a discipline or
                        disciplinary specialty than in a sense of belonging to a community of
                            practice within which tools and methods are primary and objects of study
                            are secondary considerations.
                    
                         (my emphasis)
                
            
This sounds very much like a dismissal of the possibility described earlier of
                creating hedgefoxes - of somehow also cherishing that part of humanities scholarship
                which is based on the hedgehog’s ability to work long and hard and with intense
                rigor on one particular topic. Are Burdick, et al. telling us, we cannot help
                wondering at this point, that humanities scholarship will only be concerned with
                process, form, design - in short, the how - after all? What
                happened to the what - and what happened to those very central
                questions asked a few pages earlier: 
                    How can the Digital Humanities keep
                        the ways of the hedgehog alive in the era of the fox’s ascendance? How do we
                        inject deep digs into the free-ranging ways of networked
                        scholarship?
                    
                
            
To this reader, these last two questions posed by Burdick, et al. are the very
                questions that Digital Humanities (DH) scholars ought to become more interested in
                answering at the present moment. If none of the willingness to discuss the
                    what and to encourage hedgehog competences survives, then
                the humanities and its scholars will stand in danger of losing core competences such
                as engaging with 
                    questions of value and
                        interpretation, with the realms of rhetoric as well as logic, with
                        subjective judgment alongside attention to verifiable truths.
                    
                 Seeking to be like the social sciences and the natural sciences by
                appropriating quantifying methods and approaches will not make the humanities less,
                but more obsolete.
In the following, it is the what that concerns me rather than
                the how - scholarly arguments rather than concrete DH
                practices. Though teaching and core curricula are - and should be - related to
                scholarship in obvious ways, the pursuit of basic knowledge and cognition in
                humanities research merits our attention in and of itself, it seems to me. The more
                widespread the use of digital technology becomes, and the more humanities scholars
                start working through as opposed to merely with computers, the more important it
                becomes for us to look at the ways in which digital technologies transform knowledge
                production and scholarly research.
Arguing for the need to find a better balance between the how of
                the new digital methods and technologies and the what of older,
                more traditional humanities methods, my article will be divided into three parts. I
                will start by discussing the wish, expressed by some DH scholars, for a new, digital
                    Bildung. What does this Bildung consist of, how will it be propagated and what role will it
                conceivably play in rethinking the humanities? The second part of the article
                discusses the encounter between what C.P. Snow once called the Two Cultures: the arts and humanities on the one hand, and the natural
                and technological sciences on the other. DH is one hybrid meeting point between the
                two cultures and it is no coincidence that the two
                    cultures debate has since come to be echoed in various DH connections.
                Part three concerns what Arthur Schlesinger Jr. in 1962 referred to as the mystique of quantitative research: the
                hegemonic drive of the quantitative approach. Questioning, a mere six months after
                F.R. Leavis had delivered a vicious response to Snow’s Two
                    Cultures lecture, the assumption that quantitative research can handle
                everything, Schlesinger essentially repeated Leavis’ main arguments.
Leavis and Schlesinger were right, I conclude, in pointing to the problems inherent
                in the wish to quantify humanities teaching and scholarship - a wish that is today
                often repeated by DH scholars.

                I. The background: DH, digital Bildung and the
                    future of the humanities
                As David M. Berry sees it, the time has now come for a third-wave Digital
                    Humanities. Neither the first- nor the second-wave DH, as they have been
                    described by e.g. Todd Presner and Jeffrey Schnapp in their Digital Humanities Manifesto 2.0 from 2009, 
                        The original Digital Humanities Manifesto was authored by Todd
                        Presner (UCLA) and Jeffrey Schnapp (Harvard University), for the Mellon
                        Seminars in Digital Humanities at UCLA. The 26 statements of the original
                        Digital Humanities Manifesto then evolved into the 50 positions of Version
                        2.0 from 2009 which is available at http://www.humanitiesblast.com/manifesto/Manifesto_V2.pdf (last
                        accessed on February 28, 2013). The quotations used in this paper are from
                        this document.  squarely confronts the core expectations and views
                    typically held by humanities scholars - those 
                        unspoken assumptions and
                            ontological foundations which support the normal
                            research that humanities scholars undertake on an everyday
                            basis,
                        
                     according to Berry.
                At the very center of Berry’s third-wave Digital Humanities is the notion of a
                    digital Bildung or computational
                        literacy. 
                        
                            In short, Bildung is still a key idea in the digital university,
                                not as a subject trained in a vocational fashion to perform
                                instrumental labour, nor as a subject skilled in a national literary
                                culture, but rather as a subject which can unify the information
                                that society is now producing at increasing rates, and which
                                understands new methods and practices of critical reading (code,
                                data visualisation, patterns, narrative) and is open to new methods
                                of pedagogy to facilitate it.
                            
                        
                     This is a literacy which responds to what many have described as the
                    current computational turn and which not only understands
                    culture through digital technology, but also wishes to explore the cultural
                    dimension of computation. The classical kind of Bildung - the one we know from German Enlightenment thought which
                    involved the regulating force of philosophy and rational thinking in some form,
                    and which promised help in finding order and meaning in the shape of 
                        the professor who tells you what
                            you should be looking up and the three arguments in favour of
                                it and the three arguments against
                                it,
                        
                     as Berry puts it - is no longer sufficient. In order to cope with the
                    digital onslaught of data and information to which we are subjected on a daily
                    basis today, we need a different kind of rationality: a computational
                    rationality which is directed toward neither the past nor the future, but
                    instead toward the here and now in an attempt to 
                        
                            Jetztzeit-mediate,
                        
                     Berry writes, using a term from Walter Benjamin.
                What we are potentially looking at here, according to Berry, is nothing short of
                    a Kuhnian paradigm shift - a moment of revolutionary science, in the Kuhnian sense,
                    during which a new normal
                        science will emerge. Computer science and the reading and writing of
                    computer code play an especially poignant role in this paradigm shift, he
                    speculates - though not in the sense that 
                        the existing methods
                            and practices of computer science become hegemonic
                        
                    , but rather in the sense that 
                        a humanistic
                            understanding of technology could be developed, which also involves an
                            urgent inquiry into what is human about the computational
                            humanities or social sciences.
                        
                    
                     In How We Think: Digital Media and Contemporary
                            Technogenesis, N. Katherine Hayles also speculates about a
                        paradigm shift 
                            from linear temporal causality
                                to spatialized grids extending in all directions and incorporating
                                rich connections within themselves as well as cross-connections with
                                other grids.
                            
                        
                     This is all the more urgent as it will most likely become more and more
                    difficult to tell the difference between man and machine - to identify the
                    requirement for what makes something human as opposed to mechanical. If humanities scholars want the humanities to
                    play any kind of role in the new normal science currently emerging, this is the very moment to
                    become involved.
                Berry’s recommendation that a humanistic approach concerning the reading and
                    writing of computer code be promoted is one that is shared by other DH scholars.
                    In Digital_Humanities, Anne Burdick, Johann
                    Drucker, Peter Lunenfeld, Todd Presner and Jeffrey Schnapp promote what they
                    refer to as Generative Humanities.
                    Though they do not play with a possible third-wave DH, but more or less stay
                    within the framework suggested by the Digital Humanities
                        Manifesto 2.0, their stated goals are rather similar to Berry’s.
                    Topping that list of goals is the creation of a core curriculum for
                    undergraduates that is built around fundamental activities
                    such as curation, analysis, editing, and modeling. It is one that emphasizes
                    design, multimediality and the experiential, encourages process rather than
                    finished product, and views the creation of works of art as a communal process,
                    encompassing the combined efforts of authors, printers, typographers, layout
                    artists, and designers, among others.
                The humanist spirit that will hopefully be the outcome of
                    teaching future humanities undergraduates to think with imagination and to then
                    translate that imagination into creative and innovative action is intimately
                    connected to 
                        approaches that tolerate
                            relativism and diversity in thinking, orders of experience, and, yes,
                            fundamental values
                        
                    , according to Burdick, et al. Among these fundamental values is the
                    digital enfranchisement of the public - a wish to 
                        at least posit, if not fully
                            enable, a future in which participation is possible for everyone,
                            anywhere, anytime. It would be as if it were possible to bring about a
                            public sphere in which no one was excluded. This is the core human value
                            of the Digital Humanities.
                        
                     The authors openly acknowledge this wish as a utopian
                        element or utopian impulse - one that seems
                    similar to the old Enlightenment dream of access to knowledge and education for
                    everyone which inspired Robert Darnton and others to work over the past few
                    years toward the establishment of the Digital Public Library of America. 
                        See http://dp.la/. For a longer discussion
                        on this, please see . 
                
                One important part of this visionary digital enfranchisement discourse is its
                    association with technology and the digital more generally.  A number of
                        scholars have attempted to draw our attention to the fact that human beings
                        have always accumulated technology because it increases our opportunities,
                        individually as well as collectively. For some, this imposes a moral duty on
                        us to further technological development because we thereby increase the
                        options and opportunities for people around the world. See .  In an article published in the American Historical Review in 1998, U.S. Historian Roy
                    Rosenzweig maintained, for example, that the two most important contextual
                    frames into which to put the rise of digital computing were the Establishment
                    1960s of the Vietnam War and the Cold War, and the 1960s as counter-culture and
                    antiwar movement. Both the closed world discourse of the
                    Cold War and the open-world discourse of the counterculture
                    had to be taken into account as discourses that helped shape the internet.
                    Understanding these dual origins would make it possible, also, 
                        to better understand current
                            controversies over whether the Internet will be
                                open or closed
                        
                        
                    , Rosenzweig argued.
                Time has proven Rosenzweig right. Those controversies over the internet are still
                    very much with us; indeed, they have in some ways become more bitter as a result
                    of what has come to be known as the copyright
                        wars - the pitched battles over new technology, business models and
                    consumers, between those attempting to expand copyright protection and those
                    trying to circumvent it. But this only goes to show the importance of the
                    internet and of digital communication, and several historians have followed
                    Rosenzweig’s invitation to historicize and contextualize both. Some have been
                    especially interested in the closed world discourse 
                        As historians concentrating on the closed world
                        discourse have pointed out, it was U.S. Cold War spending on military
                        projects that originally funded many of the most important post-World War
                        Two technological discoveries. With both an economic crisis going on and
                        support for deregulation growing, public funding for science and technology
                        started to drop in the late 1970s, though. One result was that the internet
                        was privatized and computers became a private, individual and commercial
                        project. See e.g. .  while others have
                    focused more on the open world discourse.
                Historians focusing on the open world discourse have shown
                    how the computer quickly came to be considered a tool for global learning and
                    thereby helped shape the process of globalization and a growing consciousness of
                    the processes of global integration.  See e.g. .  One example is Project
                    Gutenberg, founded in 1971, which was and still is 
                        powered by ideas, ideals, and by
                            idealism
                        
                    , as its founder Michael Hart once put it; 
                        we want to provide as many eBooks in
                            as many formats as possible for the entire world to read in as many
                            languages as possible.
                        
                     Another is Logo, the first programming language written especially
                    for children, introduced by Seymour Papert as early as 1967. Logo became the
                    start of the program One Laptop Per Child whose Mission Statement reads:
                        To create educational opportunities for the
                        world’s poorest children by providing each child with a rugged, low-cost,
                        low-power, connected laptop with content and software designed for
                        collaborative, joyful, self-empowered learning. When children have access to
                        this type of tool they get engaged in their own education. They learn,
                        share, create, and collaborate. They become connected to each other, to the
                        world and to a brighter future.
                     One Laptop per Child, Mission Statement – available at http://laptop.org/en/vision/
                        (last accessed on March 13, 2013). 
                
                More recently, DH scholar Patrik Svensson has also emphasized the link between
                    visionary thinking and technological development (Svensson 2012, 65). Remarking
                    how the constant challenges waged at core approaches and methods add to the
                    sense of a field that is dynamic and constantly changing, he sees the truly
                    interdisciplinary nature of DH and the way in which it potentially operates
                    across all humanities disciplines as a big advantage when it comes to applying
                    for funding, national as well as international, where there may be a need for
                    Big Humanities to match Big Science projects. 
                
                Key words - for Svensson as for Burdick, et al., Berry and many other DH scholars
                    - are urgency and change; the need for rethinking and pushing against the
                    boundaries of existing and established structures and ways of thinking. Because
                    most of the work done within DH is collaborative and project-based and its
                    concrete outcome often is digital publications that do not fit easily into
                    traditional academic patterns of reward and support, moreover, many within the
                    DH community press for changes to accommodate their work. When we add to this
                    the sense that many humanities scholars have of competing for funding,
                    recognition and the place of their respective disciplines within higher
                    education, it is easy to understand how DH could become 
                        a platform or means for
                            rethinking the humanities and higher education and a way of channeling
                            transformative sentiment that often goes far beyond the digital
                            humanities proper.
                        
                    
                
                There is indeed much at stake for the humanities and for its students and
                    scholars, as Kathleen Fitzpatrick sums it up in Planned
                        Obsolescence: Publishing, Technology, and the Future of the Academy
                    (2011): Whether or not we believe in those beautiful visions for a
                    transformative discourse in relation to DH, humanities scholars have to embrace
                    a new digital Bildung at this point. Otherwise, our
                    disciplines will simply cease to be relevant. The economic crisis has given
                    urgency to debates about the role of the humanities – again and again. From
                    fights over academic publishing to debates about what form academic writing
                    should take in the digital age, humanities scholars are faced with major
                    challenges. And the only thing that is certain, Fitzpatrick argues, is that if
                    we hide our heads in the sand and refuse to engage with the new media, we will
                        lose.
                
            

                II. Bridging the gap between the two
                        cultures?
                It is interesting that at the core of the wish for digital enfranchisement of the
                    public we find a somewhat traditional (American) multicultural argument. As the
                    authors of Digital_Humanities see it, today’s
                    humanities curricula suffer from a gap between traditional methods of pedagogy
                    focusing on linear text and those of the multidimensional world of the Web and
                    the mediated culture in which we live today. Directed as they were at 
                        inherited curricula, which were
                            rightly seen as constrained by issues of race, class, gender, and
                            first-world biases rooted in Eurocentric traditions
                        
                    , the culture wars and canon debates of the past thirty years were an
                    attempt to bridge that gap - an attempt that has unfortunately not been entirely
                    successful. The result has been that the humanities have come to be seen today
                    as out of touch with life outside the walls of the university. This has in turn
                    led to an attempt to move more students into vocational training in order that
                    higher education may be reserved for more elitist-minded students (Burdick, et
                    al. 2012, 23).
                It was a different, though related, kind of gap that inspired F.R. Leavis to
                    engage in fierce dialogue with his Cambridge colleague C.P. Snow in the early
                    1960s: that between what the latter termed the
                        Two Cultures, the technological and natural sciences on the one hand
                    and the arts and humanities on the other. The interest in higher education was
                    one that Leavis shared with Burdick, et al. and other DH scholars, though - at
                    bottom, the famous Two Cultures debate
                    had everything to do with what ought to be the core curriculum of the
                    humanities. It is therefore perhaps no coincidence that echoes of the old debate
                    have found their way into the DH community. Indeed, from the very beginning,
                    Susan Hockey tells us in The History of Humanities
                        Computing, 
                        humanities computing has had to
                            embrace 
                                the two cultures
                            , to bring the rigor and systematic unambiguous procedural
                            methodologies characteristic of the sciences to address problems within
                            the humanities that had hitherto been most often treated in a
                            serendipitous fashion
                        [my emphasis].
                    
                
                Humanities computing, which later developed into DH, has always been a visionary
                    discourse, as we saw. One such visionary attempt to use the digital as a means
                    of renegotiating the humanities and to rely on digital networks to further
                    interdisciplinary work is the Humanities, Arts, Science, and Technology Advanced
                    Collaboratory. More commonly known as HASTAC, it describes itself as, A network of individuals and institutions inspired
                        the possibilities that new technologies offer us for shaping how we learn,
                        teach, communicate, create, and organize our local and global communities. 
                        We are motivated by the conviction that the digital era provides rich
                        opportunities for informal and formal learning and for collaborative,
                        networked research that extends across traditional disciplines, across the
                        boundaries of academe and community, across the 
                            the two cultures
                         of humanism and technology, across the divide of thinking versus
                        making, and across social strata and national borders. [My emphasis]
                     HASTAC – available at http://hastac.org/about-hastac. 
                
                HASTAC wishes to provide a forum for, and thereby further, the interconnected and
                    interactive global nature of knowledge today – a forum that will blur sharp
                    distinctions between research, education and other activities and that will
                    extend DH beyond the humanities themselves to industry, cultural institutions
                    and the art world. The ultimate vision, though, is finding a way of bridging the
                        two cultures – defined here as not
                    only those of the humanities and the sciences/technology, but also those of
                    theory versus practice. What is interesting about the HASTAC statement is the
                    way in which it also includes a vision of bridging social divisions as well as
                    national borders digitally. Many of these elements were present in the debate on
                        the two cultures between C.P. Snow
                    and F.R. Leavis.
                Sir Charles Percy Snow did a Ph.D. in Chemistry at the University of Cambridge,
                    but it was as a novelist and government official that he became a well-known
                    figure to the English public. Between 1940 and 1970, he published eleven novels
                    that became known collectively as Strangers and
                        Brothers. These novels were very successful; they sold widely and
                    were translated into many different languages. Frank Raymond Leavis was less of
                    a public figure. Within the academic community, though, he was recognized as one
                    of the most influential figures in twentieth-century English literary criticism.
                    He did a Ph.D. in English at the University of Cambridge where he taught for
                    many years and was well known for his decisive and often provocative
                    judgments.
                
                    The Two Cultures and the Scientific Revolution was
                    the Sir Robert Rede Lecture at Cambridge of 1959. In it Snow brought to public
                    attention what he considered to be a dangerous divide between the ethos and
                    practices of the sciences and those of the old humanities (especially Latin and
                    Greek). The British educational system had over-rewarded the latter at the
                    expense of scientific and engineering education with the result that people in
                    politics, administration, and industry were ill-equipped to manage the modern
                    scientific world. Snow’s lecture started a debate about the relative importance
                    for British culture and for the British educational system of the two cultures - a debate to which
                    Leavis contributed with his Richmond Lecture, entitled Two
                        Cultures? The Significance of C.P. Snow and delivered in Downing
                    College, Cambridge, in February 1962.
                It is Leavis’ reaction to Snow’s lecture that concerns me here. Elsewhere, I have
                    written at greater length about both Snow’s and Leavis’ points of view  My
                        interest in the Snow-Leavis debate was raised while I was working on DH as
                        an Arcadia Fellow at the University of Cambridge in the fall of 2011. The
                        article that was my output as an Arcadia Fellow is available at http://arcadiaproject.lib.cam.ac.uk/docs/DigitalHumanities.pdf.
                        The following paragraphs build on this article.  - arguing for a
                    better balance between the how and the
                        what of DH, as I am in this particular context, it is
                    especially Leavis’ view of things that is relevant because it was precisely the
                        what that also concerned Leavis, and that he kept
                    defending vis-à-vis Snow’s Technologico-Benthamite view of the world. In and of himself, Snow did not matter
                    to Leavis; it is what he represented that was the problem. With all his clichés,
                    repetitions and sentimental banalities, Snow was too obvious, too lacking in
                    depth in the sense of questioning the received truths of the Zeitgeist, material but especially spiritual, Leavis thought. Snow
                    could not stop talking about social hope and he preached a
                    way of salvation that entailed welfare for all in terms of
                    material standards of living, advantages of technology and scientific
                    hygiene.
                The dimension that Leavis most of all found lacking in Snow was the individual,
                    the human one. Though all human beings share certain common features - hunger
                    and thirst, for example, and the fact that we all have eyes, noses, legs and
                    arms - 
                        individual lives cannot be
                            aggregated or equated or dealt with quantitatively in any way.
                        
                     Spiritually, we are all different and it counts - or ought to count - how
                    each individual human being thinks and feels. Snow’s social
                        hope did not catch that inward quality of individual life, that
                    kind of existential thought and experience which might ultimately lead to
                    something as old-fashioned as wisdom. At one level, what was at stake was what
                    the Germans would call Weltschmerz - the tragic
                    feeling and creative probing into the big questions about life and death which
                    may at its best produce great art and literature: 
                        In coming to terms with great
                            literature we discover what at bottom we really believe. What for - what
                            ultimately for? What do men live by - the questions work and tell at
                            what I can only call a religious depth of thought and feeling.
                        
                    
                
                At another level, the issue, as Leavis saw it, was the pace of life that modern
                    science and technology seemed to result in. Snow had kept stressing, in his Rede
                    Lecture, the urgency of his concerns, the speed with which today turns into
                    tomorrow - 
                        we have very little time. So little
                            I dare not guess at it
                        
                     - but he hadn’t really paused to consider the deeper implications of
                    this. Brakes must be applied sometimes, Leavis thought. It was not that Snow was
                    wrong in advocating improvements in scientific education and in living standards
                    for everyone; it was more that 
                        such concern is not enough -
                            disastrously not enough.
                        
                     Things were changing so rapidly, and critical reflection was urgently
                    needed to help make sense of it all - and to prevent the worst scientific
                    blunders which, in the atomic day and age, could have fatal results. Moreover,
                    important ethical issues could well be at stake - issues that perhaps scientists
                    themselves would not be aware of: 
                        The advance of science and
                            technology means a human future of change so rapid and of such kinds, of
                            tests and challenges so unprecedented, of decisions and possible
                            non-decisions so momentous and insidious in their consequences, that
                            mankind - this is surely clear - will need to be in full intelligent
                            possession of its full humanity (and ‘possession’ here means, not
                            confident ownership of that which belongs to us - our
                            property, but a basic living deference towards that to which, opening as
                            it does into the unknown and itself unmeasurable, we know we belong). I
                            haven’t chosen to say that mankind will need all its traditional wisdom;
                            that might suggest a kind of conservatism that, so far as I am
                            concerned, is the enemy. What we need, and shall continue to need not
                            less, is something with the livingness of the deepest vital instinct; as
                            intelligence, a power - rooted, strong in experience, and supremely
                            human - of creative response to the new challenges of time; something
                            that is alien to either of Snow’s cultures.
                        
                    
                
                Intellectual depth and complexity along with a both critical and creative
                    response to change - or life, an essential concept to Leavis
                    because it was right at the core of what it means to be human - this is what
                    humanities scholars such as Leavis himself could help preserve. Without the creation of the human world, including
                        language, he argued, the triumphant
                        erection of the scientific edifice would not have been possible. The
                    word language is crucial here. To Leavis, language was not
                    just a means of communication; it was through language that meaning was created
                    - meaning which was then transmitted through literature as a cultural community or consciousness. The
                    place where this cultural consciousness might be sustained was the university,
                    and because language was central to thought and thought, past as well as
                    present, would be communicated via literature, the center of the university
                    ought to be  vital English School,
                    Leavis maintained: 
                        Like Snow I look to the university.
                            Unlike Snow, I am concerned to make it really a university, something
                            (that is) more than a collocation of specialist departments - to make it
                            a centre of human consciousness: perception, knowledge, judgment and
                            responsibility. And perhaps I have sufficiently indicated on what lines
                            I would justify my seeing the centre of a university in a vital English
                            School.
                        
                    
                     See . 
                
                Throughout his lecture, Leavis anxiously claimed that he was not himself a
                    Luddite, but that he would be dismissed by Snow and his cohort as being one, the
                    moment he pointed to the complexity of current technical and intellectual
                    developments. Any criticism voiced would be seen as inevitably highbrow - a negative term wielded against
                    anyone who attempted to work toward qualitative, rather than quantitative goals: 
                        The upshot is that if you insist on
                            the need for any other kind of concern, entailing forethought, action
                            and provision, about the human future - any other kind of misgiving -
                            than that which talks in terms of productivity, material standards of
                            living, hygienic and technological progress, then you are a
                            Luddite.
                        
                    
                
                Just as Snow personified for Leavis everything that was currently wrong, so
                    Leavis was for Snow in the end just another Luddite. Today, the name of each is
                    very much associated with the two cultures debate of which they were the main
                    protagonists. As we find ourselves in the middle of another technological
                    revolution - this time a digital one - we are once more very concerned with what
                    the implications will be for our research and our way of thinking and writing.
                    To what extent will the technologically savvy, already as fully converted to the
                    digital cause as Snow was to the scientific revolution, carry the day - and on
                    what terms? And to what extent will those of us who care about the humanities be
                    allowed to fret about the present state and future of our disciplines in the
                    same way that Leavis wondered about what can and should be done, without being
                    considered highbrow, elitist snobs?
            

                III. The mystique of quantitative research
                Snow’s lecture got an immediate response, both positive and negative, and he
                    later thought that this must be because he had touched on something which was
                    already in the air: It was
                        clear that many people had been thinking on this assembly of topics. The
                        ideas were in the air… any of us could have produced a hubbub. Apart
                    from the fact that these ideas were not all that original to him, what could be
                    inferred from this, Snow claimed, was that 
                        there must be something in
                            them.
                        
                    
                
                Snow had a point. Whether or not people agreed with him - and Leavis and many
                    others obviously did not - he was on to something that greatly interested
                    people. In fact, there was a similar debate going on at the University of
                    Oxford. Here, Isaiah Berlin took the leading part in building a new graduate
                    college, Wolfson College, which would promote the powerful scientific and
                    technological developments of the time. And across the
                    Atlantic, famous historian and special assistant to President Kennedy between
                    1961 to 1963 Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. gave a talk to the American Sociological
                    Association at its fifty-seventh annual meeting in August 1962 (a mere six
                    months after Leavis had reacted so strongly to Snow) in which he discussed what
                    he considered to be the hegemonic drive of the quantitative approach. This
                    particular annual meeting of the ASA being in honor of Paul Lazarsfeld, who was
                    considered by many to be one of the founders of modern empirical sociology,
                    Schlesinger had called his talk The Humanist Looks at
                        Empirical Social Research.
                
                Schlesinger started out with a cri de coeur: 
                        Insofar as empirical social
                            research can drive historians to criticize their assumptions, to expose
                            their premises, to tighten their logic, to pursue and respect their
                            facts, to restrain their rhetoric - in short, insofar as it gives them
                            an acute sense of the extraordinary precariousness of the historical
                            enterprise - it administers a wholly salutary shock to a somewhat
                            uncritical and even complacent discipline.
                        
                    
                
                Having thus demonstrated that he had absolutely no quarrel with empirical social
                    research per se and that, as a historian, he felt indebted to sociologists such
                    as Lazarsfeld, Schlesinger then went on to clarify that the problem he wanted to
                    address concerned the way in which many sociologists had come to consider
                    empirical social research not one of several
                        paths to social wisdom, but the central and in-fallible path. Having
                    fallen under the spell of what Schlesinger thought could only be called the mystique of empirical social research,
                    these sociologists had increasingly come to understand empirical social research
                    as above all, quantitative research - that is,
                        research which deals in quantifiable problems and yields numerical or
                        quasi-numerical conclusions. He stressed once again that he did not
                    wish to be misunderstood; no historian could possibly deny that quantitative research, complete with IBM cards and
                        computers, can make an important contribution to historical
                        understanding. What he questioned was the assumption that such
                    quantitative research can handle everything
                        which the humanist must take into account. And perhaps worst of all,
                    Schlesinger argued, was the dismissal of everything non-quantifiable as being
                    irrelevant and un-important. What quantitative methods are not very good at
                    handling can in fact well be 
                        the things that matter
                            most,
                        
                     he speculated - and then ended by going beyond his own discipline to
                    conclude with a couple of paragraphs that concerned the humanities as a whole: 
                        There is much, I would add,
                            which we must leave, whether we like it or not, not just to historians
                            but to poets, novelists, painters, musicians, philosophers, theologians,
                            even politicians, even saints - in short, to one form or another of
                            humanist. For an indefinite future, I suspect, humanism will continue to
                            yield truths about both individual and social experience which
                            quantitative social research by itself could never reach. Whether these
                            truths are inherently or merely temporarily inaccessible to the
                            quantitative method is a question which only experience can answer.
                                In the meantime, this humanist is bound to say that, as an aid to
                                the understanding of society and men, quantitative social research
                                is admirable and indispensable. As a guide to the significance of
                                problems, it is misleading when it exudes the assumption that only
                                problems susceptible to quantitative solutions are important. As a
                                means of explaining human or social behavior, it is powerful but
                                profoundly incomplete. As the source of a theory of human nature and
                                of the universe, it is but a new formulation of an ancient romantic
                                myth.
                        
                        
                    
                
                Leavis would have agreed wholeheartedly. As Guy Ortolano has shown, it was not
                    the importance of science and technology that Leavis questioned, but rather the
                    complete endorsement by modern civilization of ideals such as description, logic
                    and clarity - to the exclusion of older, more qualitative ideals.
                    For neither Leavis nor Schlesinger, that is, was it
                    ever a question of science/technology versus the arts and humanities - but
                    instead a question of finding the right balance between quantifying and
                    qualitative ways of thinking. Both are important - and both offer us something
                    that we cannot do without.
                It is precisely this insight - that we are not talking about an either/or, and
                    that we are and should not be engaged in trench warfare - which makes it
                    worthwhile to look at the old ‘two cultures’ debate. In its modern DH version, I
                    would suggest, this means realizing that both qualitative and quantitative ways
                    of doing research are needed - and that the furthering of a ‘humanist spirit’ or
                    new digital Bildung leads to our not
                    letting ourselves be pushed completely into quantitative ways of thinking by the
                    technologies that give rise to the DH. Instead, we should work toward developing
                    a humanistic understanding of technology, along the lines of what
                    Berry suggests. 
            

                IV. Concluding remarks
                Viewed in an optimistic light, Bernhard Rieder and Theo Röhle correctly point
                    out, the great interest among humanities scholars for the digital media looks
                    like the emergence of a new and genuine trans-disciplinarity: 
                        Digital humanities - an
                            endeavor at the forefront of crossing boundaries and research traditions
                            - would seem to bridge the gap between the two cultures
                             (Snow 1959), between the quantitative orientation of the natural
                            sciences and critical cultural discourses in the humanities
                        [my emphasis].
                    
                
                If we look more closely, however, we risk finding a wish to compete with the
                    natural sciences on their own turf by doing objective research, with the help of
                    machines, which aims to reduce as far as possible any kind of human, subjective
                    bias and/or emotion. Reminding us how, in the nineteenth century, the drive for
                    objectivity led to the belief in mechanical objectivity, and how this
                    very belief was fought tooth and nail up through the twentieth century by
                    humanists who wanted the role of human interpretation to be recognized, Rieder
                    and Röhle warn about what they call the lure of objectivity and, in relation to
                    that, the quest for universalism. To the lure of objectivity must be added the
                    power of visual evidence. While having previously often questioned scientific
                    images by raising the issue of representation and referentiality, humanities
                    scholars now increasingly use images in their own research - seemingly
                    furthering the view that numerical and visual reasoning is much more easily
                    acceptable as evidence
                    than is textual rhetoric which is considered by most scientists to be argumentation only .
                
                Rieder and Röhle have no clear-cut answer to the challenges to what they, too,
                    consider to be a Kuhnian paradigm shift in favor of computer-based approaches.
                        Could computerized research make more
                        traditional scholarship (look) obsolete, they ask; is there a danger of catering too much to short
                        attention spans while at the same time cruising on technology’s aura of
                        objectivity? Being themselves all in favor of computer-based
                    approaches, they do advocate that humanities scholars get involved with and try
                    out the new computer-based methods. But they conclude their article by insisting
                    on a thoughtful and critical approach - one that raises inopportune questions
                    when the need arises: 
                        In order to develop a
                            sensibility for the wider repercussions of methodological innovation, it
                            is crucial that we understand not only the potential but also the limits
                            of these new methods. Obviously, building research tools is not an end
                            in itself and in many areas there is an argument to be made for the
                            confident defense of methods that are based on principles other than
                                persistent plotting.
                        
                        
                    
                
                Like Rieder and Röhle, I think - and have in this article argued - that the many
                    new developments within DH must be discussed with a view not only to their
                    potential, but also to their limits. Whether or not it may properly be
                    classified as a Kuhnian paradigm shift - and the vote is still out on this - the
                    digital turn and the involvement with computer-based approaches will cause
                    substantial changes for both the teaching and the research in the humanities. A
                    number of humanities scholars have not yet understood the importance or, indeed,
                    the enormity of this turn - especially when it comes to their way of doing basic
                    research. Whereas a lot has been written on the impact on our teaching and
                    dissemination of knowledge in the humanities, not that many scholars have tried
                    to grapple with the impact on humanities research and recognition - with the
                    epistemological consequences of working through computers. 
                We are repeatedly told, by politicians, funding agencies and colleagues in other
                    parts of Academia, that if we want to stay vital, interesting and relevant we
                    need to reformat ourselves in the humanities. In the late
                    1950s and early 1960s, F.R. Leavis and Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. perceived their
                    core humanities disciplines - literature and history, respectively - to be under
                    duress by the hegemonic drive of the quantitative approach, so highly
                    recommended by people such as C.P. Snow and Paul Lazarsfeld. This made them take
                    up and rephrase for their own time the age-old debate about the two cultures. Perhaps we should do something similar
                    today, as computer-based approaches force us to reexamine the relationships of
                    the what to the how within the
                    humanities. DH is one hybrid, contemporary meeting point between the two
                    cultures. In the DH, the two cultures literally overlap, thereby providing an
                    excellent case study for the future of the humanities.
            
