Title:  A Historical Geographic Information System (HGIS) of Nubia
                    Based on the William J. Bankes Archive (1815-1822)
Volume:  011
Issue:  2
Date:  22 May 2017
Abstract:  
                
                The William J. Bankes Archive, Dorchester, is an impressive collection of
                    original material concerning the archaeological, anthropological and natural
                    heritage of Nubia and was amassed in the years 1815-1822. In the last two
                    hundred years, many geo-human factors caused radical changes in the region. In a
                    landscape almost untouched for centuries, the signs of the interactions between
                    the ancient human communities and the natural environment were much clearer in
                    Bankes’ times than now. Digital humanities offer powerful tools to manage and
                    visualize large amounts of data and GIS in particular is an effective form of
                    relational database, where all items of data have a position on the earth. This
                    paper presents the methodology and the preliminary results of a research project
                    that aims at a draft reconstruction of ancient Nubia based on the Bankes
                    Archive. Archaeological, historical, natural history and ethnographic
                    information extracted from the documents will be georeferenced in the GIS.
                    Original maps, landscape views and epigraphic copies will also be made available
                    on-line. 
            
Full Body Text: 

                
                William J. Bankes (1786-1855), an Englishman with conspicuous financial means and
                    a voracious appetite for antiquities, travelled throughout Egypt and the Near
                    East in the years 1815-1819 . During and after his
                    stay, he hired a number of skilled draughtsmen to record almost all then-known
                    archaeological sites in Egypt and Nubia. Until 1822, men in his service produced
                    an impressive amount of diaries, accounts, letters, maps, drawings, plans and
                    landscape watercolours that are mostly still unpublished .

                In the last two hundred years, many geo-human factors caused radical changes in
                    these areas, especially in Nubia. In a landscape almost untouched for centuries,
                    the signs of the interactions between the ancient communities and the natural
                    environment were much clearer in Bankes’ times than now.

                This paper introduces a cross-disciplinary research project in Digital Humanities
                    that ran in the years 2014-2016 at the Dahlem Research School, Freie Universität
                        Berlin.Dahlem Research School POINT Fellow 2014-2016, Dahlem
                        Humanities Center. The project is based at Research Unit of Prof Dr Klaus
                        Geus (Historical Geography of the Ancient Mediterranean,
                        Friedrich-Meinecke-Institut), whom I want to thank for his constant support.
                        I would also like to thank Mr Rainer Streng, who designed the MA Access
                        Database and provided invaluable suggestions, and Mrs Undine Lieberwirth,
                        TOPOI, for sharing her GIS expertise. My thanks also to Prof Dr Jochem Kahl,
                        Egyptology Seminar, Freie Universität Berlin, who read a preliminary version
                        of this paper. The project attempts to create a reconstruction of
                    ancient Nubia through the study of the Bankes Archive. A historical geographic
                    information system (HGIS) is used both for structuring and presenting on a
                    digital map the information extracted from the Bankes’ documents. Once the data
                    are loaded on the HGIS, data interpretation relies comprehensively on ancient
                    written sources and modern archaeological reports, in order to highlight
                    relationships between the different entries in the gazetteer in terms of
                    distance, travel time, climate, ethnicity, polity, environment, water
                    management, and trade resources. The outcome of the research project will be an
                    Internet open HGISA preliminary reference page with complementary
                        information, images, updates, and data can be found at the following
                        address: http://www.palamedes.eu/bankes/, intended as a tool for
                    scholars researching the different historical periods of the region, but also
                    for those interested in ethnographic, geological and biological data. The
                    methodology described here hopes to help researchers interested in using HGIS
                    and dealing with documents that do not allow statistical analysis of microdata
                    such as the census.
            

                Changes and ultimate loss of Nubia (1820-2006)
                In this paper, for reasons of simplicity the term Nubia — traditionally intended
                    as the region between the first and the sixth cataract of the Nile — comprises
                    also the state of Sinnar and the northern part of historical Fazogli,
                    corresponding to the area covered by the Bankes papers.
                In the last two hundred years, Nubia witnessed radical political changes, from
                    the Turco-Egyptian conquest (1820-22) to the Anglo-Egyptian decolonization
                    (1945-56). The size of these changes is enormous and sometimes difficult to
                        grasp.For a general description of the events and the historical
                        background, see Robinson , Holt , Cornevin , and Fahmy
                            . The region underwent significant
                    variations in trade patterns and exploitation of land and resources,
                    introduction of new cultures, migration and gradual transition from nomadism to
                    sedentary life and from village/tribal to urban life. Finally, the building of
                    new infrastructures and mass tourism strongly reshaped the area.
                Changes had already started with the conquest of Upper Nubia in the years
                    1820-1822: the new Turco-Egyptian administration replaced the government of the
                    Mameluke remnants in Dongola and the network of local chieftains within the Funj
                    Sultanate. All aspects of life were heavily affected, including the historical
                    heritage of the region. Many of the monuments recorded by the early travellers
                    had suffered extensive damage already during the 19th century. From the two
                    peripteral chapels at Elephantine (1822) to the portico of the temple of Dabud
                    (1868), countless Nubian archaeological sites suffered destruction or vandalism
                        . Many drawings made between 1815 and 1822
                    reveal details now missing in the temples of Dandur, Qartassi, Tafa, Kalabsha,
                    Bayt al-Wali, Jarf Husayn, Quban, Qurta, Wadi al-Sibu’a, Amada, Dirr, Qasr
                    Ibrim, Meroe, Nuri, Musawwarat al-Sufra, and Abahuda.
                The dissolution of this ancient landscape with its many sites, shaped through the
                    centuries by several civilizations, accelerated during the 20th century with the
                    construction of a series of dams on the Nile. The first Aswan Dam was built in
                    1902, but damage from the rising Nile waters was limited and the area affected
                    extended only for 100 kilometres along the river south of Aswan. The dam was not
                    intended to store water all the year round and the lake that it created was
                    therefore seasonal. The barrage was raised in 1912, extending the lake to 150
                    kilometres and further damaging cultivation. Census and compensation data for
                    palm trees reveal a dramatic decrease in agricultural potential: 400 palm trees
                    were left in the district of Dabud from over 11,000 before the heightening. Same
                    in Kalabsha, where from 14,000 the number dropped to under 600, and in Mariya
                    from 11,000 to 500. Compensation for 9,376 palms was paid in Sayala . A third elevation in 1933 extended the
                    lake to 290 kilometres: the Nubians living on the river had to adapt to a higher
                    seasonal inundation, either moving up the sides of the riverbanks or to a new
                    location .
                In 1960, the Egyptian government started the construction of a new dam in Aswan;
                    the lake began to rise in 1964 and was operational by 1970. Creating a permanent
                    lake rather than a seasonal one, the effects of the dam on Lower Nubia were
                    enormous: 500 kilometres of Nile valley were permanently flooded. The immediate
                    result was the relocation of around 100,000 people both in Egypt (48,000) and in
                    the Sudan (50,000), with no less than 536 affected villages in Egyptian Nubia
                    only . The High Aswan Dam literally wiped
                    out the region of all its human and natural landmarks. The area submerged was
                    wide enough to cause the disappearance of much of the fauna, flora, and
                    villages, in addition to much of the peoples’ own heritage, memories of and
                    bonds to their traditional space .
                More Nile dams were built in Sudan too: the Sinnar Dam in 1922-25, the Jabal
                    Aulia Dam in 1937, the al-Damazin Dam in 1966, and the Merowe Dam in 2005-2009
                        . As more barrages are under contract in Dal,
                    Sharayk and Kajbar, the Nubian heritage is once again under serious threat; the
                    monuments at Sulb, Sai Island, Sabu and Nauri are among the five hundred sites
                    listed as at risk .
            

                The Bankes Archive (1815-1822)
                Although mentioned in Egyptological literature since the 1950s, the Bankes
                    Archive is one of the least known sources on ancient Egypt and Nubia and at the
                    same time one the richest collections of 19th century Egyptological manuscripts.
                    In this article, the use of the term Bankes Archive, in fact,
                    includes all the documents that were produced during the expeditions funded by
                    Bankes, but that are held in different institutions and in different
                    countries.
                The main body of the collection is housed at the Dorset History Centre,
                    Dorchester, United Kingdom. It belongs to the National Trust, which inherited it
                    from the last member of the Bankes family in 1982. It is made of roughly
                    two thousand documents, comprising records from three different Nubian
                    journeys: the first made in 1815 by Bankes in the company of F. Barthow and G.
                    Finati; another made in 1819 with W.H. Beechey, H. Salt. J. Hyde and A. Ricci; a
                    third made by Linant, Finati and Ricci in 1821-22. It is an impressive
                    collection of notes, sketches, epigraphic copies, landscape and monument views,
                    measured plans and elevations, architectural details, maps and drawings of
                    ethnographic or natural subject. The collection includes also around three
                    hundred letters and other items of correspondence between Bankes and various
                    important personalities such as G.B. Belzoni, L. Burckhardt, and J. Hyde. Most
                    letters exchanged between Bankes, Salt and Linant during the expedition also
                    survive. A full catalogue of the Egyptian collection was compiled only in 2011
                    and made available on-line .
                A small but important part of the original collection is now housed at Kingston
                    Lacy House, the Bankes family mansion. There, twelve drawings by Bankes,
                    Beechey, Linant and Ricci are on public display. More interesting are two
                    manuscripts kept in the library: one is a copy of the famous Meroe travelogue
                    written by Linant for Bankes and already partly published by Margaret Shinnie
                        . The second manuscript is an unpublished
                    historical-ethnographical account of the Upper Nile region, written in French
                    but with an English title added by Bankes: General Notices
                        upon all the Principal Countries and Peoples Comprehended in the Journey of
                        A. Linant when Sent by W. J. Bankes to See for Meroe and to Examine the
                        Course of the Nile. It is a 108-page manuscript divided into forty
                    chapters of different nature: regional descriptions, ethnographic observations,
                    and some historical notes.
                Two large volumes of notes and copies of Coptic and Greek inscriptions made
                    during the 1819 travel are currently at the British Museum, Department of
                    Ancient Egypt and Sudan.Reference Number BM/AES 125. They amount to
                    roughly two hundred pages. As part of the project, the current author was able
                    to digitize the two volumes in the summer of 2014.
                Alessandro Ricci made some drawings on his own that he did not deliver to Bankes;
                    he also wrote a full account of his travels in Egypt and Nubia. The original
                    manuscript has a long story of discoveries and losses ; it is now believed to be in the former Royal
                    Library of ‘Abdin Palace in Cairo.A faithful transcription of the
                        manuscript was found in the National Archives of Egypt in 2009 and is being
                        published . For the current project,
                    only two hundred of the original three hundred pages are relevant: they describe
                    a first Nubian journey with Bankes in 1819 and the full Sinnar expedition of
                    1821-22. The 140 drawings Ricci made for himself are housed in the Florence
                    Egyptian Museum and cover Nubia only partially.Usick .

            

                HGIS Scientific Objectives
                The Bankes HGIS Project tackles different scientific issues and has several
                    objectives. The main research question addresses the possibility to access
                    ancient Nubia though 19th century sources. It does not imply that the Nubia seen
                    by Bankes’ men was exactly like ancient Nubia, but that it can be a good
                    approximation of it. Sources are obviously not limited to the Bankes Archive:
                    crosschecking early photographs, topographical surveys, and recent
                    archaeological and ethnographic research will help to refine the picture given
                    by the Bankes papers. In fact, the landscape went through little changes during
                    the long period up to the Turco-Egyptian conquest and for some time later. There
                    were unquestionably major innovations, such as the introduction of the
                    waterwheel in Graeco-Roman time, and constant alterations of the Nile course.
                    Islands would disappear or change size according to the flood level and after
                    every flooding season. Nevertheless, the little soil available for cultivation
                    always kept the Nubian population quite low, especially in the northern part of
                    the country. Distance between settlements and the lack of effective transport
                    means increased the relative isolation of the region. The landscape swiftly and
                    dramatically changed in the 20th century with the construction of Nile dams and
                    the consequent relocation of entire populations and the loss of all tangible and
                    intangible heritage. Making any regional research in the area is impossible
                    without the use of historical sources and, if the construction of new dams will
                    further proceed as scheduled, it will be more the case in the future.
                A second research question addresses the use of Digital Humanities for the
                    display, management and interpretation of archival sources and it does so
                    specifically in a historical and geographical context. For this reason, the
                    project aims at providing a theoretical framework for the use of HGIS in
                    historical research and addresses some issues such as data accessibility and
                    visualization and replication of the HGIS model.
                On a practical side, the Bankes Nubia HGIS will also be a tool for accessing and
                    browsing part of the Bankes Archive collection. Thanks to an agreement with the
                    Dorset History Centre and the National Trust, all drawings concerning Nubia —
                    which have already been digitized — will be geo-localized and made available
                    on-line through the HGIS, while a set of metadata will give additional
                    information on the single drawings. This alone is an important achievement, but
                    more will come from the integration of the images with other information
                    extracted from the Bankes Archive.
            

                GIS and HGIS
                The information carried by a large and diversified collection of sources such as
                    the Bankes Archive needs specific tools for analysis and display. Although
                    relatively a new field, GIS — and even more recently HGIS — has developed to
                    become an excellent tool to manage and use geographic data, where information is
                    linked to an exact geographical representation of it. GIS is also the quickest
                    and easiest way to produce maps, which offer an immediate and synthetic
                    visualization of the information provided by different documental sources and
                    can be easily accessible by a wide range of public. There are different GIS
                    software with an easy-to-use interface for both the researcher and the custom
                        user.The project makes use of ESRI’s ArcGIS and of Quantum GIS.
                    This kind of software also allows shaping the outcome of the GIS in different
                    ways: a gazetteer, an on-line zoomable atlas, a set of printed maps, or even a
                    Keyhole Markup Language (KML) file ready for users to download. Nevertheless, to
                    date only few projects in the Humanities effectively use GIS.See http://www.hgis.org.uk/,
                        (accessed 20 March 2015) and http://www.aag.org/cs/projects_and_programs/historical_gis_clearinghouse/hgis_projects_programs,
                        (accessed 10 September 2016).
                Use of GIS technology has grown in the last twenty years, especially in the field
                    of archaeology. More recently, HGIS has grown as a separate field of study and
                    some early projects have already delivered interesting results. Looking at a
                    quick survey made by Ian Gregory and Paul Ell, HGIS seems to be mainly used for
                    either urban historical research or statistical macro-regional research (at
                    nation, continent or world level). In the first case, HGIS looks at the development of urban space or the change of allocated land/population and
                    integrates historical maps, photographs, and 3D reconstructions into the
                    database. Such is the case of the Sydney TimeMap
                        Project
                    , the Mapping Medieval
                        Chester: Place and Identity in an English Borderland City
                        c.1200-1500 project,Mapping Medieval
                            Chester: Place and Identity in an English Borderland City
                            c.1200-1500, http://www.medievalchester.ac.uk/index.html, (accessed 8
                        September 2016). or the Visualizing Urban
                        Geographies project.Visualizing Urban
                            Geographies, http://geo.nls.uk/urbhist/, (accessed 12 September 2016).
                    The second kind of research involves a quantitative approach to data aggregation
                    and makes extensive use of statistical data from census or parish registers.
                    This is the case of The North-West Shropshire Tithe Maps
                        and Apportionments,The North-West
                            Shropshire Tithe Maps and Apportionments, http://gisweb.massey.ac.nz/nwshropsresearch/intro.htm, (accessed
                        8 September 2016). the Atlas of the Great Irish
                        Famine, and the Visions of Britain through Time
                        Project
                    . This last project in fact included and
                    georeferenced some data from travellers’ tales, thus approaching the kind of
                    sources used in the Bankes HGIS. The International Dunhuang
                        Project at the British Library also digitised and georeferenced
                    notes, pictures and maps from the Dunhuang Expedition.Gregory and Ell ; The
                            International Dunhuang Project, http://idp.bl.uk (accessed 20 March 2015). Other
                    interesting projects, blending historical and geographical research, maps, a
                    varied amount of sources, and graphic metadata (plans, cross sections,
                    photographs) are the Mapping the Jewish Communities of the
                        Byzantine Empire projectMapping the
                            Jewish Communities of the Byzantine Empire, http://www.byzantinejewry.net/, (accessed 9 September
                        2016). and the Mapping Gothic France
                            project.Mapping Gothic France, http://mappinggothic.org/,
                        (accessed 9 September 2016).
                In the field of Classics, the Pleiades
                            GazetteerPleiades, http://pleiades.stoa.org/
                        (accessed 20 March 2015). and the Pelagios
                        Project,Pelagios Project, http://pelagios-project.blogspot.com/ (accessed 20 March
                        2015). which use ancient sources, are definitely worth mentioning.
                    Many other projects, on the other hand, do not offer much historical analysis,
                    but rather use GIS as a means of displaying historical information through
                    animated maps. This is the case of the Animated Atlas of
                        African History 1879-2002Animated Atlas
                            of African History 1879-2002, http://www.brown.edu/Research/AAAH/index.htm, (accessed 8
                        September 2016). or the Salem Witch Trial
                        Documentary Archive and Transcription Project.Salem Witch Trial Documentary Archive and Transcription
                            Project, http://salem.lib.virginia.edu/home.html, (accessed 8 September
                        2016).
                Because of the lack of reliable statistical information for Nubia in the early
                    19th century, the Bankes HGIS relies on documents very different from those used
                    by most of the previous HGIS examples. For this reason, the project is also an
                    occasion to reflect on the possible uses of HGIS in historical research. One of
                    the issues addressed when building up our own HGIS was the way to make
                    comprehensive use of the documents in order to extract and visualise as much
                    information as possible and at the same time reducing input possibilities and
                    error risk. Discussion and negotiation with IT experts proved extremely useful
                    to find a balance between the need for exhaustive documentation and the
                    technical possibilities of the database.
            

                Accuracy assessment
                As seen in the previous paragraphs, the Bankes Archive is an extremely rich
                    collection of well-integrated, interconnected sources, produced by different
                    authors with the same objectives in a limited range of time and space. All these
                    features make it a most valuable source of information. Still, one needs to
                    assess accuracy and reliability in order to assure that the data extracted are
                    scientifically acceptable.
                There are different factors that make the Bankes Archive a particularly reliable
                    source of data. Primarily, there are no doubts about the skills of the authors:
                    Bankes was a history graduate from Cambridge with a sound knowledge of history,
                    Latin and Greek; Ricci was a physician, therefore he had a training in
                    chemistry, biology, botany, drawing and classics; Linant was a midshipman with
                    training in cartography, astronomy and drawing. Although none of them was an
                    academic stricto sensu, the level of knowledge
                    they possessed was much higher than that of an average traveller of their
                    time.
                At the same time, they had no artistic goals: they did not aspire to a career in
                    the art establishment nor had a public to show their paintings to; nevertheless,
                    they possessed the technical skills to make accurate architectural plans,
                    epigraphic copies, and landscape views. Since Bankes was funding their activity,
                    there was no interest in making their production more attractive with the
                    prospective of a sale. Furthermore, accuracy can be verified in the case of
                    subjects captured in drawing by different hands from different points of
                    view.
                The same is true for the travelogues and the notes: they were to be handed over
                    to Bankes, who would dispose of them as he wished. No publisher was to be
                    searched for, no money was to be made out of an exciting travel narrative.
                    Different is the case of Ricci’s own travelogue, which in fact he wrote for
                    publication. The text is extremely attractive and clearly manipulated to excite
                    the audience, nevertheless Ricci failed to publish. Comparisons with the
                    travelogues written by Linant, Frediani and D’AthanasiGiovanni D’Athanasi,
                            A brief Account of the Researches and Discoveries
                            in Upper Egypt, made under the direction of Henry Salt Esq.
                        (London: John Hearne, 1836). reveal the points were Ricci introduced
                    elements of fantasy for literary purposes.
                The reliability of the Bankes Archives is enhanced by other factors, such as the
                    adequate scientific knowledge of the period, especially if compared with
                    16th-18th century travelogues. Bankes, Linant and Ricci also had at their
                    disposal some scientific equipment, such as telescopes, thermometers, and most
                    likely other astronomical and scientific tools, including clocks, barometers,
                    sundials, and perspectival machines (camera
                        lucida or camera obscura). A last
                    factor is the relatively comfortable conditions of their journey. Despite still
                    running some risks in a country at war or recently conquered by the means of
                    ruthless oppression and violence, Ricci and Linant were able to travel at ease,
                    never lacking the necessary funds and often protected by the army.
            

                Manuscript Transcription and Data Collection
                While some of the documents have been at least partially published, others needed
                    to be transcribed in order to be used and properly quoted. The amount of notes
                    and sketches would make it impossible to transcribe the whole archive, so
                    transcription was essentially limited to the travelogues, in particular the
                    unpublished parts of Linant’s diary (version of Kingston Lacy), his General Notices (see above), and Ms. XXI.B.58 (a short
                    account on fauna in the so-called Island of Meroe). A transcription of Ricci’s
                    travelogue was available as part of the author’s PhD dissertation too. These are
                    in fact the core documents, which provide the most important information related
                    to the movements of the expeditions, the toponyms, and the description of the
                    areas crossed. By transcribing them, we made sure that the most important
                    information was not left out.
                All the geographical and non-geographical information extracted from the
                    documents of the Bankes Archive are divided into categories, as follows: 
                        Nature – BioticClassification of human-environment interactions
                                according to Redman (1999).
                            
                                Vegetation
                                Fauna
                            
                        
                        Nature – Abiotic 
                                Climate 
                                        Floods, precipitations
                                        Winds
                                        Atmospheric and Water temperature
                                    
                                
                                Geology 
                                        Types of rocks, soil
                                        Topography
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                        Culture – Biotic 
                                Ethnic Groups 
                                        Tribes (distribution, migration patterns)
                                        Immigrated communities
                                    
                                
                                Ethnography 
                                        Rites, customs, religions, etc.
                                        Handcrafts
                                        Social structures, languages, etc.
                                    
                                
                                Traffic 
                                        Trade routes, river or land ancient routes
                                        Roads and dirt tracks
                                        River crossings
                                    
                                
                                Historical Data 
                                        Battles, important events, epidemics, etc.
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                        Culture – Abiotic 
                                Archaeological Heritage 
                                        Ancient Egyptian monuments
                                        Medieval sites
                                        Post-Medieval buildings
                                        (With notation of disappeared monuments, missing or
                                            ruined parts, moved buildings, etc.)
                                    
                                
                                Settlements 
                                        Cities, towns and villages with toponyms
                                        Temporary settlements (Bedouins, trade, military
                                            camps)
                                        (With civil, military and religious administrative
                                            rank and presence of a specific building, i.e. barracks,
                                            depots, cathedrals, etc.)
                                    
                                
                                Water management 
                                        Wells, springs, widian, oases, dams and submerged
                                            areas
                                    
                                
                                Economy 
                                        Crops, orchards, agricultural plots, gardens
                                        Domesticated animals
                                        Market sites, products traded, slave caravanserai,
                                            mining sites
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
            

                Gazetteer Setup
                A starting point for the HGIS is to create a gazetteer for geographical names and
                    features referred to in the documents. This is sometimes challenging because
                    name places are recorded in English, French, and Italian transcription, with
                    many mistakes and misunderstandings due to the lack of knowledge of the local
                    languages/dialects and the unscientific methodology used in the transcription
                    itself. The same name is sometimes spelled differently in the same source.
                A first step is to collect in a spreadsheet all the toponyms used in the sources,
                    taking care of recording all variations within the source and between the
                    different sources. This is important for it allows the user to use any spelling
                    while querying the database. Some features are described in the sources without
                    giving a name: it is sometimes possible to identify the feature with a modern
                    toponym. In other cases, they will be included in the gazetteer as an anonymous
                    feature, i.e. a castle or a ruined village. There are 1004 entries in the
                    gazetteer, comprising 821 different toponyms and 60 anonymous or unidentified
                    features.
                A second step is to collect the coordinates of the single features. For this
                    purpose, there are some official gazetteers with coordinates given in degrees
                    and minutes, but these are generally too imprecise to be of use.Gazetteer of Egypt. Names Approved by the United States
                            Board on Geographical Names (Washington DC: Defense Mapping
                        Agency, 1987). Some data are collected from the National
                    Geospatial-Intelligence Agency Names Server (GNS),National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency Names Server (GNS),
                            http://geonames.nga.mil/gns/html/index.html (accessed 20 March
                        2015). freely available on-line. This also provides the standard
                    spelling according to the US Board on Geographic Names, even though it does not
                    follow the scientific transliteration of Arabic names. Most coordinates given
                    here are also decimal conversions from degrees/minutes-only coordinates, and are
                    therefore approximations. In the project, spelling of names was generally normalized to a scientific transliteration of Arabic.
                Most of the coordinates were retrieved using Google Earth or through maps
                    georeferenced on a GIS software. Google Earth is ideal for features clearly
                    visible on the satellite imagery, such as mountains, islands, and some
                    settlements. Nametags in Google Earth and Google Maps are often imprecise, so
                    orientation is provided in combination with other printed topographical maps. On
                    the other side, maps georeferenced with a GIS software provide coordinates for
                    features now lost (submerged by the rising waters of the dam lakes) or
                    unidentifiable on satellite imagery. The maps need to be geo-rectified with a
                    given Coordinate Reference System (most often WGS 84/UTM Zone 36N or Egypt
                    1907/Red Belt). Coordinates capture is possible through simple mouse navigation
                    over the features. Free Nubian maps are available on-line, the most useful
                    sources being undoubtedly the Perry-Castañeda Map Library of the University of
                    Texas at Austin,Perry-Castañeda Library Map
                            Collection, http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/ (accessed 20 March 2015); most
                        maps are those in scale 1:250,000 published by the US Defence Mapping Agency
                        Topographic Service (1975) or the US Army Map Service, Series Y502
                        (1953-1960) and P502 (1953-1959). the David
                        Rumsey Map CollectionDavid Rumsey Map
                            Collection, http://www.davidrumsey.com/ (accessed 20 March 2015). and
                    the Durham Sudan Archive.The Sudan Archive, Durham University, https://www.dur.ac.uk/library/asc/sudan/  (accessed 20 March
                        2015); Sudan Survey maps in scale 1:250,000, published between 1901 and
                        1937. Other maps otherwise not available on-line were consulted and
                    freely scanned thanks to an agreement between the TOPOI Excellence Cluster and
                    the Kartenabteilung of the Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin.Particularly useful
                        was the General’nyj Štab 1:200,000 K 4020 series (1978). I should like to
                        thank Dr Wolfgang Crom, director of the Kartenabteilung of the
                        Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin for his patience and support, and the
                        Freundeskreis für Cartographica for funding my research there.
                    Particularly good survey maps can also be found in Weigall , The Archaeological Survey of
                        Nubia,Reisner , Firth . Roeder , Emery
                    and Kirwan , Kush,Most useful are Adams , Adams
                            , Säve-Söderbergh , Adams and Nordström , Mills , Mills and
                        Nordström , Säve-Söderbergh , and Donner . Hinkel , and Ritter .

            

                Access Database and GIS Database
                Once the gazetteer has been compiled, data collection can start. For this
                    purpose, a specific structure for a database management system (MS Access in
                    this case) was created. MS Access was chosen because it has a particularly
                    user-friendly Graphical User Interface; at the same time, it is solid enough to
                    handle the Bankes HGIS at this stage of data preparation without the need of a
                    specific GIS software. Most important, a MS Access database can be connected to
                    ArcGIS via Open Database Connectivity: this is a live connection, not a data
                    snapshot, thus enabling to formulate complex SQL queries directly in MS Access.
                    MS Access also allows a single person to work on the entire database with
                    particular ease.
                All data extracted from the documents according to the previous classification
                    were stored in the database in a structured manner. Metadata were also stored
                    for every item of data, such as author (Bankes, Linant, Ricci, etc.) and source
                    name (reference number of drawing, title of manuscript with page number, etc.).
                    The database contains an entry for every place with its coordinates and an entry
                    for every visit, with dates of arrival. This second characteristic enables the
                    possibility to represent time in the HGIS, in particular it will allow to reckon
                    distances covered by the travellers following certain land routes or sailing up-
                    or down-stream.
                The project is currently (August 2016) in the stage of transferring the data to
                    ArcGIS as shape files or geodatabase tables. The features will be geo-localised
                    on the map using specific symbology, while all metadata will be available in
                    pop-up tables. The representation through vector data can be in the form of a
                    polygon (e.g. a governmental district), a polyline (e.g. a path, a route
                    followed by a traveller) or a point feature (e.g. a settlement, a well, a
                    tree).
                Symbology will be structured through different icon sizes, colours and shapes to
                    represent the different nature of the settlements: for example, colour coding
                    can distinguish time phases (e.g. Old Kingdom within the Ancient Egyptian
                    phase). Icon size can mark the position of the settlement in the political
                    hierarchy, from small village to regional capital. Different sets of more
                    elaborate icons can indicate agricultural production and trade traffic.
                The issue of unidentified or dubious features, for which exact coordinates are
                    not available because the source does not allow a precise identification (e.g.
                        Two hours south of the camp there was a village), specific symbology
                    will be used. A different solution could be the use of fuzzy logic, which allows
                    to georeference a point feature within a given area  In most cases, nevertheless, a point marked as dubious would
                    be enough, because the progress of travellers is usually very slow, making it
                    easy to georeference a point between a preceding and a following stop. In
                    addition, the accurate description of the surrounding landscape helps a lot in
                    identifying the area.
                GIS layers will not only be created using data from database tables, geodatabase
                    tables and shape files. Some layers were already directly drawn in ArcGIS with
                    the help of georectified maps: such layers comprise the historic Nile course
                    with its islands and the district areas.

            

                Data Interpretation
                Some HGIS projects aim at making data available to the public. They extract a
                    huge amount of data from archival documents, for example census records, and put
                    them on-line on an HGIS: this is definitely a useful result as not always
                    archival documents are easy to consult or even to reach. The amount of data that
                    will be available on-line through the Bankes Nubia HGIS would also justify such
                    an approach. Scholars interested in the documents would not need to travel to
                    the Dorset History Centre anymore and could access them on-line. Moreover, they
                    would be able to perform queries and conduct research according to their
                    personal interests or field of scholarship.
                Nevertheless, spatial analysis and interpretation are also required. The HGIS
                    will visualize an environment no longer extant and much closer to the ancient
                    landscape, where different populations were making successful choices of
                    exploitation. The HGIS will also help to detect specific relations between
                    different settlements and the natural environment, the concept of space itself
                    and its organization/modification through parameters like distance, river/road
                    practicability, travel time, river flood range, climate, water and trade
                    resources.
                The 19th century documents are definitely a good source for the general
                    reconstruction of Nubia; still, more sources are required. Data interpretation
                    will then rely comprehensively on two different references: ancient written
                    sources and modern archaeological data. In the first group, we list Ancient
                    Egyptian, Greek, Coptic, Old Nubian and Arabic literary and non-literary texts,
                    religious compositions, and inscriptions, as well as classical historical
                    sources. In the second group, there are archaeological field reports,
                    iconographical and architectural studies, and ethnographic surveys.
                    Archaeological surveys in particular are important for the identification of the
                    different sites of the gazetteer. Starting from the 1905-07 Oriental Institute
                            ExpeditionThe 1905-1907 Breasted Expeditions
                            to Egypt and the Sudan, http://oi.uchicago.edu/collections/photographic-archives/1905-1907-breasted-expeditions-egypt-and-sudan
                        (accessed 29 April 2015). and the following Egyptian Antiquities
                    Service survey (1907-1911),Reisner , Reisner
                            , Firth , Firth
                            , Firth , and Firth
                            . many publications were devoted to the
                    monuments of the Middle and Upper Nile Valley, in particular Ancient Egyptian
                        temples,Weigall , Roeder , Emery and Kirwan . Christian churches,For example Mileham , Somers Clarke , Andriolo and Curto , and Adams . and Medieval Fortresses.Crawford
                            , Drzewiecki . Archaeological and ethnographic work in the area intensified in
                    the 1960s before the completion of the Aswan High Dam  and produced a rich collection of data (in
                    particular the AUC Nubian Ethnological Survey and the work of Anna
                    Hohenwart-Gerlachstein). Recent works provide very detailed information on
                    regions that were not submerged by the Aswan High Dam in 1970.Welsby , Žurawski , Adams
                            , Adams , Osman
                        and Edwards , Anderson and Welsby , and Nordström .
                Whenever possible, comparisons with the current human and environmental situation
                    will highlight the major changes occurred, especially in the relationship
                    between human communities and the environment.

            

                Conclusions
                While all societies worldwide in the last hundred years have undergone
                    significant changes both economically and socio-politically, few areas have
                    witnessed more dramatic events than the regions flooded by the many dams along
                    the Nile. With the physical annihilation of the area, cultures and traditions
                    were also eradicated, economic systems were disrupted, and historical landscapes
                    wiped out.
                Ancient sources are useful to reconstruct the whole region as a system and a
                    network, still they are insufficient because of lacunae, inaccuracies and wide
                    openness to interpretations. Since the landscape and its landmarks have been
                    relatively stable for hundreds of years, it seems that historical sources dating
                    back to the early 19th century can offer an appreciable amount of data that are
                    sufficiently accurate and historically close to the past that scholars try to
                    reconstruct. For this reasons, the large documentation amassed by William J.
                    Bankes and his men in the period between 1815 and 1822 could provide a bounty of
                    information, if used correctly. Managing and displaying such a rich variety of
                    sources is not easy, unless one recurs to Digital Humanities. Technology offered
                    by GIS software has the potential to improve historical research, dissemination
                    of data and their interpretation. Imperfect and open to suggestions and
                    improvements as it is, the Bankes HGIS is a small contribution in this
                    direction.
            
