Title:  Manuscript Catalogues as Data for Research: From Provenance to Data Decolonisation
Volume:  018
Issue:  3
Date:  19 July 2024
Abstract:  
           This paper discusses a recent project which applied computational methods to catalogue data in an attempt to generate new information on the 
              provenance of Islamicate manuscripts in UK repositories. Using a subset of records taken from the Fihrist Union 
              Catalogue as a dataset, we analysed and grouped together manuscript descriptions which shared selected physical features, then examined 
              the occurrence of records with secure provenance within those groups to see if information on the place of origin could be extrapolated across 
              them. While we gained useful information regarding the provenance of manuscripts, the chief conclusion of the project was that catalogue data, 
              in its current state, poses serious challenges for quantitative analysis. This is partly due to the various purposes for which data has 
              traditionally been collected (in contexts where codicological descriptions had a different purpose) and partly due to inconsistencies in the 
              dataset. In our conclusion we put forward strategies for working with inconsistent data, make suggestions for changes to cataloguing practices to 
              answer the requirements of digital methods, and propose new research questions addressing the history of catalogues and cataloguing practices 
              which came into focus during the project. We also make a case for the potential of digital methods to enable new approaches to decolonisation, 
              focusing on data modelling, data provenance, and accessibility.
           
         
Full Body Text: 

           1 Introduction
             In Islamic Codicology, François Déroche calls upon the creators of manuscript catalogues to produce 
                ... coherent sets of documents that shed light on one another . Given the 
                complex relationships between historical manuscript cultures and collections of manuscripts, between collections of manuscripts and the 
                catalogues which describe them, and between catalogues as datasets and the outputs of digital methods, what is the nature of this 
                light? What new insights do we gain by using data derived from manuscript catalogues to generate new information 
                at scale? And in doing so, what do we learn about historical manuscript cultures, about the history and formation of collections of 
                manuscripts, about the processes by which catalogues are created, and about our own motivations as expressed in our digital methodologies?
             
             This paper discusses a recent project, funded by the Cambridge Humanities Research Grants scheme, which applied computational methods to 
                catalogue data in an attempt to shed light on the provenance of Islamicate manuscripts in UK repositories. While its focus 
                was on manuscript history, the project was created in the context of contemporary concerns around the decolonisation of collections in cultural 
                heritage institutions, which have given a new importance to research on the origins of manuscripts in UK collections. However, 
                establishing the provenance of Islamicate manuscripts presents particular challenges for both cultural and historical reasons. The places and 
                dates of production are rarely mentioned in the texts themselves — and tracing the biography of Islamicate manuscripts held in UK 
                repositories is further complicated not only by the texts' migration to the UK but also their previous movement within the 
                Islamicate world. As a result, we rely heavily on the physical features of manuscripts when attempting to ascertain their place and date of 
                production as well as their wider history.
             
             Using a subset of records taken from the Fihrist Union Catalogue for Manuscripts from the 
                Islamicate World in UK Repositories as a dataset, we used computational methods to analyse and group together manuscript 
                descriptions which shared selected physical features (size, script, orientation etc.), then examined the occurrence of records with secure 
                provenance within these groups to see if information on the place of origin could be extrapolated across them. We also investigated how new 
                information generated by this process could be integrated back into the dataset, while retaining a clear sense of its own data provenance. 
                Although we gained useful information regarding the provenance of manuscripts, the chief conclusion of the project was that catalogue data, in 
                its current state, poses serious challenges for quantitative methods. However, our engagement in the process also raised interesting questions 
                about the history and nature of the collections described, about cataloguing practices and data modelling, and about the relationship between 
                digital methods and research questions.
             
             In this paper we present our activities as a case study for digital approaches to manuscript catalogues — from collections through catalogues 
                and datasets, to computational methods and their results. In our conclusion we put forward strategies for working with inconsistent data, make 
                suggestions for changes to cataloguing practices to answer to the requirements of digital methods, and propose new research questions on the 
                history of catalogues and cataloguing practices which came into focus during the project. We also make a case for the potential of digital 
                methods to enable new approaches to decolonisation, focusing on data modelling, provenance, and accessibility.
             
         

           2 Codicology and Islamicate Manuscripts
             There are a number of reasons for the existence of large collections of Islamicate manuscripts in UK repositories. First, the 
                Islamicate manuscript tradition is in itself very large, partly due to the early adoption of paper as writing support (from the 8th century 
                onwards) and partly due to the late adoption of printing at industrial scale, which led to the survival of a tradition of copying manuscripts 
                by hand into the 20th century. This is further amplified by the historical expansion of Islam and the subsequent dominance of Arabic as the 
                language of scholarship across a large geographical area. We therefore find a vast number of handwritten texts, some of which have travelled on 
                trade or pilgrimage routes, while others remained in their area of production. In a UK context, empire, trade, and missionary 
                activities led to a long-standing engagement with Islam and the Islamicate world, which in turn led to the development of large manuscript 
                collections.
             
             Collections in Western libraries and archives, which are the focus of this study, are typically made up of items from across the Islamic world. 
                Here we find related texts, copied in different countries, which bear typical features of the craft, materials, and artwork relating to the 
                local environment in which they were produced (the Qur'an being perhaps the best example of a text which was produced extensively 
                across a wide geographical area). While the text has traditionally been the basis of philological and bibliographic research, a focus on the 
                physicality of the book as a carrier of text allows us to investigate the material culture both of the texts themselves (as different texts 
                tend to have different material contexts), and of the contexts which produced them.
             
             With the rise of Islamic codicology as an evolving discipline, physical aspects of manuscripts are attracting more attention, especially in a 
                Western context. Western collections of Islamicate manuscripts often contain a diverse mixture of traditions both in terms of places of origin 
                and eras of production. Compared to bodies of material which have remained in their original contexts, these collections can appear 
                idiosyncratic and require a different approach when investigating their origins and subsequent histories. Given the comparative lack of 
                indications of geographical origins in the text of Islamicate manuscripts, analysis of physical features has become a key method for 
                establishing provenance.
             
             Manuscript collections from the Islamicate world demonstrate an enormous variety of physical features in terms of shapes, orientations, 
                materials, layouts, and binding. The long history of paper production and use in the Middle East adds an additional layer of 
                complexity to the texts' codicological makeup. While in their current context the places of origin have often been obscured, these manuscripts 
                have nevertheless been produced within a coherent tradition. Codicology gives us a framework to establish criteria for comparative observation 
                and analysis which can give clues to these traditions. This framework, captured in machine-readable form, provides the basis for a flexible 
                and expandable data model which can respond to new discoveries and approaches.
             
         

           3 Quantitative Codicology and Manuscript Catalogues
             Quantitative codicology is concerned chiefly with the statistical analysis of the correlations between a subset of physical characteristics of 
                a corpus, as well as what the relationships between those characteristics might tell us about a) the items themselves, and b) the social, 
                economic, and cultural contexts of their production . In addition to studies based on particular manuscript 
                cultures, quantitative codicology has been widely applied in comparative research that attempts to isolate features that are the particular 
                result of the context of production (from those which are common to all contexts) and to trace the effect of cross-cultural influences and 
                borrowings on manuscript cultures . Existing computational work has tended to follow this model, concentrating 
                either on what can be inferred from relationships within a single dataset, or on combining information from two or more datasets to generate 
                new information.
             
             One of the chief challenges of quantitative work on manuscript collections is the tension between individualising and generalising modes of 
                enquiry raised by Daston and Galison in the context of the history of science .  
                Although our methodology is largely based on shared features of manuscripts, manuscripts themselves are, by their very nature, unique objects 
                which resist general approaches. Burrows has pointed to the dominance of individual or small-scale approaches in manuscript 
                studies , but, as Daston and Galison point out, there are features which only reveal 
                themselves at scale: Some significant historical phenomena are invisible at the local level, even if their manifestations 
                must by definition be located somewhere, sometime. There are developments that unfold on a temporal and geographic scale that can only be 
                recognised at a local level once they have been spotted from a more global perspective. Just as no localized observer alone can detect the 
                shape of a storm front or the distribution of an organic species, so some historical phenomena can be discerned only by integrating information 
                from a spread of contexts. 
             
             Where can we find codicological information at sufficient scale to begin to detect the shape and internal relationships of our collections? 
                Scientific analysis of physical aspects of manuscripts, such as watermark imaging and analysis, XRTF, multi-spectroscopy, and radiocarbon 
                dating, produce interesting results for individual manuscripts but are expensive and difficult to apply at scale. Automated analysis of images, 
                facilitated by IIIF, has had some success in identifying physical features such as script type and number 
                of lines per page (see for example , ), but even in the age of mass 
                digitisation the proportion of the corpus which has been imaged remains comparatively small and unevenly distributed 
                . Even for more easily accessible characteristics such as script, material, size, illustration, and binding, the 
                effort involved in assembling a new dataset at any scale through inspection of manuscripts can be proscriptive, especially for dispersed 
                collections. As Marilena Maniaci notes: Given the practical impossibility of directly examining many 
                hundreds of manuscripts, one has to accept the necessity of substituting the task with a census of data collected from previously published 
                descriptions .
             
             This leads us to existing manuscript catalogues as a source of data for quantitative approaches, but manuscript catalogues are far from 
                unproblematic as datasets, compris[ing] subsets of records written at different times, by different people, according to 
                different principles and goals . Or, in Camillo Formigatti's neat 
                formulation, [c]atalogues give manuscripts a voice, but the language in which they speak varies according to the interests 
                and priorities of the scholars who catalogue them . In a union catalogue such as 
                Fihrist, drawn together from many sources created in a variety of contexts over an extended period of time, these voices multiply.
             
             
               Digitised image and catalogue record for K.1, Cambridge University Library, recording point of acquisition but not 
                  earlier history. Note the use of language: crude coloured maps.
               Digitised image and catalogue description of manuscript.
                 
             
             Behind the catalogues, each with their different voice, lie collections — and it is debatable how far contemporary collections of manuscripts 
                in Western repositories can be thought of as representative of historical manuscript cultures. In addition to local factors in the formation 
                and survival of specific collections, such as the interests of collectors and institutions, there are issues of completeness at a more 
                fundamental level: It is necessary to take into account that the extant manuscript patrimony is but a small fraction of 
                the quantity of volumes produced; that the volumes having a date are only a small part of the extant patrimony; that neither the general 
                cataloguing of the extant patrimony nor that of the dated manuscripts is exhaustive at the present time. This multistage filter created by the 
                destructive work of time and by the inevitable gaps in reporting would not be significant if the reduction of the population at each step was 
                uniform relative to the initial state. But this is not the case. 
             
             It is tempting to label the manuscript record incomplete, but that would miss the point — it is complete on its own terms, but the 
                nature of its completeness cannot be neatly packaged and understood in relation to the record's survival and loss. Instead, the record speaks 
                to an interplay of multiple factors over time, each of which might merit our interest, which have completed the archive in its current 
                state. The archive we have is the archive we have — or, as Carolyn Steedman would have it, [i]n the Archive, 
                you cannot be shocked at its exclusions, its emptiness, at what is not catalogued … its condition of being deflects outrage 
                .
             
             Given the complex nature of both manuscript collections and the catalogues which describe them, what new information can we usefully derive 
                from computational approaches to data derived from manuscript catalogues? We followed Marilena Maniaci's pragmatic advice to give 
                up on any ill-founded attempt at achieving objectiveness and instead accept 
                ... the limits set by the adopted approach, the nature of surviving documentation, and the quantity and quality of the 
                data upon which the analysis is carried out as integral to our research . In a sense, the 
                most interesting thing about manuscript catalogue data is its very complexity — and the way in which it leads us back down through the whole 
                long stack of cataloguers and institutions, collectors and collections, data and method, loss and acquisition. Concrete results from 
                quantitative methods on manuscript collections do have value to researchers but need to be understood in the broader context of all the many 
                processes and actors which have led to the formation of the evidence we use to produce them.
             
         

           4 Related Research
             
               4.1 Ontology-Based Analysis of the Large Collection of Historical Hebrew Manuscripts
                 Projects using manuscript catalogue data to generate new information have tended (with some success) to focus on the pragmatic business of 
                    filling in gaps in our knowledge rather than on the complex nature of the data and its relation to the realities of historical 
                    manuscript cultures. Zhitomirsky-Geffet, Prebor, and Miller extracted data from the 
                    National Library of Israel's catalogue system (the largest catalogue in the world of Hebrew 
                    manuscripts ), using an event-based ontology to 
                    complete missing data by inference from the constructed ontology and from external resources and to perform a 
                    quantitative analysis of the catalogue as a whole . The new data produced 
                    by the project was generated a) by reference to external sources,For instance, if a scribe associated with a manuscript has attested 
                    dates in an external authority system such as VIAF (the Virtual International Authority File), then 
                    it is inferred that the manuscript must have been copied in that date range. and b) by inference within the dataset.For 
                    example, in a simple sense, if a scribe's dates are known then the manuscripts copied by that scribe must fall within that date range, or 
                    in a more complex sense, if a dated manuscript is associated with a scribe, then other manuscripts copied by that scribe must also exist 
                    in some relation to that date..
                 
                 The project differed from ours its concentration on texts and people (scribes and authors) rather than physical characteristics of 
                    manuscripts and in its reliance on direct inferences and references (internal and external to the dataset) based on existing information 
                    about single, known features of manuscripts rather than on groups of features in combination. While some attention was paid to the sources 
                    and nature of the catalogue data which underpinned the project, this mainly concerned inconsistencies and 
                    errors in the data which are ... explained by the fact that the catalogue has been 
                    created manually by dozens of different cataloguers during the period of over 70 years 
                    . The different attitudes, interests, and biases that may have informed 
                    cataloguing practices throughout this period are largely glossed over.
                 
                 The research was framed as an investigation of the manuscript collection itself, rather than an attempt to make large claims about its 
                    actual relation to historical manuscript culture, so a detailed discussion of the historical formation of the collection was possibly out 
                    of scope. The comprehensive and impressive section which deals with quantitative analysis of the relationships between certain aspects of 
                    the data (for instance, the most copied authors in different time periods and countries) does point to 
                    interesting potential research avenues where the completeness and nature of the surviving manuscript record as manifested in the 
                    collection would take on more importance. The influence of the accidental survival of Hebrew manuscripts over 
                    time  is acknowledged in their diachronic analysis of script types 
                    in the same dataset, which is directly relevant to our own larger research ambitions in highlighting the importance of some manuscript 
                    features, not only in localising the place of production, but also in tracing the movement of manuscript cultures over time — and in 
                    looking at how these movements might relate to contemporary political, social, environmental, and economic factors 
                    . However, we would argue that few of the factors that lead to the survival of 
                    manuscripts in collections are accidental.
                 
             
             
               4.2 Mapping Manuscript Migrations
                 The Mapping Manuscript Migrations project took the history of collections and collectors as its primary focus, 
                    combining four large datasets as the basis of an investigation into the provenance of manuscripts — that is who owned 
                    them, in which places, and at which times after the moment of their initial production: Each 
                    object has usually been part of a series of collections over its lifetime, and this movement of objects between collections has its own 
                    history. Similarly, each collection has its own history of formation and (usually) dispersal, depending on whether the collectors were 
                    individuals, private institutions, or modern public institutions … The network of relationships between people and institutions involved 
                    in the ownership and transmission of cultural collections can also reveal a good deal about the more general networks of influence and 
                    social and political relationships in a particular society. 
                 
                 While the project had its own specific research questions relating to the movement of manuscripts over time, it was also preoccupied with 
                    general issues regarding the analysis of manuscript catalogue data at scale — in particular a lack of coherent, 
                    interoperable infrastructure for the data relating to these manuscripts — which makes the visualisation and analysis of the 
                    history and movement of manuscripts … difficult — if not impossible — to carry out 
                    . In this context and building on previous work relating to the manuscript collection of a single 
                    collector, Sir Thomas Phillips, the focus was on the modelling and construction of a new linked open data resource derived 
                    from four datasets: the Schoenberg Database of Manuscripts, the Medieval Manuscripts in 
                    Oxford Libraries catalogue, and the Bibale and Medium databases of the 
                    Institut de Recherche et d'Histoire des Textes.
                 
                 As each of these datasets used a different data standard, crosswalking between formats was a core part of the project, with one particular 
                    mapping, from TEI into RDF, described in detail in a separate paper . However, the work also highlighted 
                    fundamental problems in establishing identity, not just of the manuscripts themselves, but also for entities described in manuscript 
                    catalogues. Burrows focuses on people and works, but our own research encountered similar difficulties in finding robust 
                    identification schemes or consistent vocabularies for describing physical aspects of manuscripts such as layout, script, material, and 
                    binding. What we learned from this project is that variations in metadata format are less problematic in the analysis of manuscript 
                    catalogue data than variations in the identification and description of specific aspects of manuscripts — a factor which came into sharp 
                    focus in our own work.
                 
             
             
               4.3 Legacies of Catalogue Descriptions and Curatorial Voice
                 Mapping Manuscript Migrations plays close attention to the history of collections but does not provide much 
                    discussion on the motivations or context of those who have described them, or how these are reflected in the manuscript catalogues we use 
                    as the basis for our research. This was the subject of a recent project, Legacies of Catalogue Descriptions and 
                    Curatorial Voice, funded under the Towards a National Collection 
                    programme. Legacies highlighted the specific circumstances under which catalogues are created, edited, and 
                    reused — particularly in the context of the reuse of catalogue data at scale as datasets in the digital humanities:
                    Crucially, the historically specific labours and practices of catalogue production are all too easily obscured by the 
                    presentation of the catalogue as an always-already present unifying entity, and are further obscured when collections are federated for 
                    access, into datasets, or as machine readable endpoints. 
                 
                 The project looked at the history of the transmission of the voice of a single cataloguer, Mary Dorothy 
                    George, over the course of almost a century — from printed volumes to networked digital data. Using 
                    automated methods, they were able to trace the transmission of this voice across a series of catalogues and attempt to piece together 
                    the context of the original descriptions and of the multiple acts of revision and adaptation to which they had been subject. This work has 
                    specific relevance to our dataset, which is an aggregation of legacy data and new cataloguing generated by multiple institutions over a 
                    long period. The project emphasises the additional importance of data provenance when datasets are used as the basis of computational 
                    analysis, or indeed as training data for neural networks. In our conclusion we discuss research avenues where variations in cataloguing 
                    practices (and intentions) are not only a factor in the resolution of disparate datasets but also an object of study in their own right.
                 
             
             
               4.4 Bibliotheca Arabica
                 Also of relevance to our project, both in terms of subject matter and approach, is the  Bibliotheca Arabica 
                    , a long-term project with a focus on manuscript notes and their value in discerning the circulation and 
                    origin of the manuscript in its social and historical context. Manuscript notes are important codicological features found in many 
                    manuscripts within the Islamicate and related traditions which tell us much about the history of manuscripts after the point of production. 
                    Using graph database technologies, this project identifies people and collections through their relationship to dates, works, and objects. 
                    The ambitious scope of this project, including data from collections at scale and from a variety of sources, could provide further evidence 
                    in corroboration with data derived from physical descriptions. We have already had preliminary conversations on data standardisation 
                    between our projects.
                 
             
         

           5 Dataset
             
               5.1 Fihrist
                 Launched in 2011, Fihrist originated as a JISC-funded collaborative project 
                    between Cambridge University Library and the Bodleian Libraries, Oxford to build an online catalogue 
                    for manuscripts from the Islamicate world. Descriptions and indexes of manuscripts in these collections had previously only existed in 
                    out-of-print catalogues, handlists, and card indexes, some dating back to the 18th century. The idiosyncratic structuring of information 
                    and lack of accessibility in these resources made them difficult to use and navigate. The aim of the project was to find an open, digital 
                    solution to the issue of discovering both the manuscripts themselves and the texts they contained, which went beyond the limitations of 
                    bibliographic cataloguing as applied to modern publications.
                 
                 An additional goal was to create a functional and sustainable infrastructure which could bring together collections held in different 
                    repositories, thus facilitating access and discovery across large datasets. To achieve this, we embarked on the process of manually 
                    converting descriptions from existing catalogues into standardised data and organising the resulting records in a flexible and expandable 
                    data model which could incorporate further information over time. An interface with selected search and browse functions was developed for 
                    discovery, and the data set was made openly accessible on GitHub.
                 
                 Following further funding from JISC, Cambridge Digital Humanities, and the Cambridge Humanities Research Grants scheme, 
                    Fihrist has grown to be a union catalogue for manuscripts from the Islamicate world in UK repositories, 
                    containing over 15,000 manuscript descriptions from 22 institutions. While many of these records are based on legacy data drawn from 
                    existing catalogues, the data in Fihrist has also been enriched by descriptions resulting from new research and cataloguing 
                    projects. The most obvious point of interaction with the resource is through the web interface, which has done much to facilitate discovery 
                    of and access to the manuscript material. However, in this article, our focus is on Fihrist as a dataset for research — and 
                    how using the catalogue records as data led us to critically examine the type of information traditionally collected in manuscript 
                    catalogues, as well as the correlation between selection, structure, description practices, and an evolving research landscape.
                 
                 A crucial factor in Fihrist's development was the choice of TEI as a data standard. TEI is, according to its own webpage, 
                    a consortium which collectively develops and maintains a standard for the representation of texts in digital 
                    form, expressed in a set of guidelines for the encoding and description of text. The fact that Fihrist was initially 
                    developed as a stand-alone resource meant that it did not have to conform to the restrictions imposed by existing library systems, which 
                    tended to use more restrictive metadata standards such as MARC or EAD. This allowed us to take advantage of the flexibility and 
                    expandability of TEI in integrating manuscript research into the descriptive records.
                 
                 Equally important was the adoption of some of the established standards, classifications, and taxonomies used by libraries and archives. 
                    While providing a set of lightweight hierarchical structures, TEI is broadly agnostic about the contents of elements and attributes. 
                    Reusing bibliographic standards for names and subjects, abbreviations for languages, and standardised transliteration systems was intended 
                    to facilitate the creation of content that was both internally consistent and compatible with that found in other datasets — in particular 
                    Anglo-American-language-based libraries and archives. Fihrist also maintains its own internal authority files for names, 
                    works, and subjects, which are linked where possible to external identifier schemes such as the VIAF and the Library of 
                    Congress, enabling future linked open data approaches.
                 
             
             
               5.2 TEI
                 With its ability to capture complex data for both publication and analysis, [t]he Manuscript Description section of 
                    TEI Guidelines has become the de-facto schema for structuring detailed descriptions of manuscripts 
                    . For catalogue data it crucially allows us to capture narrative information in combination with 
                    encoded values suitable for quantitative approaches. While TEI has been criticised for offering various ways of 
                    encoding the same basic information, with no definitive agreed standards , in this 
                    respect it simply reflects a fundamental issue in data-driven digital humanities: Some of the most fertile and urgent 
                    areas of digital humanities research involve the question of how to develop data modelling approaches that accommodate both the 
                    self-reflexivity required by humanities research and the actionability and computational clarity required by the digital domain. 
                    
                 
                 While TEI is not without its drawbacks, many of the criticisms aimed at it are misplaced (see e.g., ). The 
                    complexities around variation in practice, intention, and vocabulary which became clear in our project are real issues arising from 
                    manuscript cataloguing itself, not necessarily inherent in TEI. The open and flexible nature of TEI simply provides a framework for these 
                    issues to be discussed, clarified, and recorded. A number of scholars (including ourselves) have written on TEI's role as a research 
                    community rather than a metadata standard (e.g., , , 
                    ), and its guidelines have evolved and continue to evolve in response to new materials and 
                    methodologies.
                 
                 Our own collaborative activities have been centred on the development of a 
                    consolidated schema for manuscript description that forms the data 
                    model of a number of digital libraries, manuscript catalogues, and large, interoperable datasets for research.
                 
                 When we first started to use TEI for manuscript description in the OCIMCO project to create a combined data set for Islamicate manuscripts 
                    from Cambridge and Oxford, we had no prototype other than the schema generated for 
                    Enrich, a project focused on the description and 
                    encoding of European manuscript resources. While this served as a basis, it was felt that a more customised approach was required for 
                    Islamicate manuscripts, following an established mindset focused on the differences between manuscript cultures rather than what they might 
                    have in common. A schema was commissioned which contained specialised elements for distinct features, such as the encoding of 
                    patronymic names and ruling practices.
                 
                 However, while working with this schema, we came to the conclusion that we had made a conceptual error and that a standardised and 
                    consolidated approach across manuscript cultures was a more effective data model which would foster the kind of interdisciplinary work we 
                    were interested in. This approach focussed on the remodelling of data to make it responsive to digital methods and research questions, 
                    rather than trying to replicate the organisation and structures present in the legacy data. Our consolidated approach has generated 
                    interesting discussions about the feasibility and/or desirability of using a single schema a) across manuscript cultures, and b) to answer 
                    a variety of research questions. We address some of these issues in our conclusion.
                 
                 One fundamental feature of our dataset is worth exploring in more detail. TEI allows you to use the Manuscript Description (msDesc) module 
                    either in the header (the descriptive metadata part of the record) or in the text element (as a transcription of the source 
                    document). At an early stage we made the pragmatic decision to encode manuscript descriptions in the header, thus treating them as 
                    descriptive metadata rather than as source texts, in large part to allow the text element to be used for transcription of the 
                    manuscript itself. However, this decision to treat catalogue descriptions only as metadata about manuscripts rather than as 
                    texts to be transcribed (and described) in their own right is perhaps the source of some of the confusion which can surround the use of 
                    manuscript catalogues as datasets (the same would apply to the transformation of manuscript catalogues into MARC or EAD records, or into 
                    other metadata formats).
                 
                 What gets lost is the concept of catalogues as texts in themselves, with their own contexts, histories, styles, and sources. By obscuring 
                    the complex nature of catalogues as texts in their own right, we invite their use as always-already present unifying 
                    entit[ies] with all of the accompanying problems and pitfalls that entails . It may 
                    be that in future projects the creation of digital editions of manuscript catalogues from which data about manuscripts can be derived as a 
                    secondary process would be more helpful in retaining a sense of the nature and provenance of the data that they contain, particularly when 
                    adding context to the results of computational processes.
                 
             
         

           6 Methodology and Results
             
               6.1 Summary
                 Our core method was to group together manuscripts that share selected physical features and then to examine those groups to see if 
                    information derived from manuscripts with an established place of origin could be extrapolated across those for which this information is 
                    lacking. The scripts were written for use with the Fihrist dataset but should work on any TEI dataset that uses the 
                    Manuscript Description module. The scripts are in Python and 
                    have been deliberately kept short and simple (no more than 200 lines of code) to facilitate reuse. The scripts have been documented and 
                    made openly available on GitHub.
                 
                 The first stage in our methodology was to identify relevant manuscript features (such as script, language, size etc.) in consultation with 
                    subject specialists. We then extracted these features from the TEI dataset and normalised them to give values that would group effectively 
                    (see below for details). Quantitative analysis of general patterns in this subset of data (such as proportion of manuscripts originating 
                    from different countries, number of decorated manuscripts, etc.) gave us pointers as to which features were likely to be indicators of 
                    place of origin and should therefore be included in the grouping process.
                 
                 The subset of normalised data was then grouped into sets of manuscripts that shared these features, and any grouping of 10 or more 
                    manuscripts was evaluated by the subject specialists to see whether the information on the place of origin was significant. At this stage, 
                    the subject specialists fed back into the grouping process, suggesting new or refined features, and the grouping was re-run until 
                    satisfactory results were obtained. The final stage was to integrate the newly-generated hypothetical information back into the 
                   Fihrist dataset.
                 
                 
                   Project workflow.
                   Diagram showing project workflow.
                     
                 
             
             
               6.2 Selection Criteria and Data Extraction
                 In consultation with subject specialists, we assembled an initial list of criteria that were a) recorded in TEI dataset in such a way 
                    as to be available to computational analysis, and b) considered most likely to provide clues as to the place of origin of the manuscripts. 
                    The criteria selected were: the material the manuscript was written on, the script, the language, whether or not the 
                    manuscript was decorated, the orientation, the number of written lines, and the size of the manuscript.
                 
                 We then built a subset of TEI data containing these criteria, along with information allowing us to identify the manuscripts and the 
                    provenance information we were attempting to extrapolate across the groups:
                    
                      Criteria used to identify the manuscript: msid (system id), filename, repository, collection, idno (classmark/shelfmark)
                      Criteria we wanted to extrapolate across the groups: start_century, end_century,  origplace, country
                      Criteria used in the grouping process: material, script, mainlang (language), decorated, orientation, lines, size
                    
                 
                 Some of these (msid, filename, repository, collection, idno, origplace, material, script, mainlang) were extracted directly from values 
                    in TEI elements or attributes. The remainder (start_century, end_century, country, decorated, orientation, lines, size) were derived from 
                    TEI elements and attributes but processed (binned) to give broader categories of values that were more suitable for grouping than the very 
                    specific values used in TEI:
                    
                      start_century and end_century: Derived from ISO dates recorded in the from, to, and when attributes on the origPlace 
                        element
                      country: Automatically generated from the contents of the origPlace element using the 
                        GeoPy Python library
                      decorated: A binary yes/no value derived from the presence or absence of at least one decoNote element
                      orientation: Landscape or portrait, derived from height and width values in the dimensions element
                      lines: 1-10, 11-20, or 21_plus, derived from the @ruledlines attribute on the layout element
                      size: L (large), M (medium), or S (small), derived from the height and width values in the dimensions element
                    
                 
                 The script that extracts and processes these values, tei_to_csv_and_dataframe.py, currently relies on having a copy 
                    of TEI dataset locally, but it could be easily reconfigured to run off an API (e.g., Cambridge Digital Library's 
                    TEI API, or, with some amendment to the code, 
                    IIIF manifests). It generates two outputs: a csv file, which is a versatile file for input into a range of mapping and network analysis 
                    tools, and a Python dataframe file, which is used as the input to the grouping process.
                 
             
             
               6.3 Initial Quantitative Analysis
                 Quantitative analysis of the data was performed using the dataframe_to_plot.py script. The primary purpose of this 
                    script was to establish general patterns in the data which would be helpful both in selecting criteria for grouping and in evaluating the 
                    grouping process. The script takes as input Python dataframe files and outputs graphs showing statistical information by time (century) or 
                    by place (country). You can also choose to view the statistics either by number of manuscripts with a particular feature, or by percentage 
                    of manuscripts with a particular feature.
                 
             
             
               6.4 Grouping
                 The subset of data in the Python dataframe file generated by tei_to_csv_and_dataframe.py was then grouped using the 
                    dataframe_to_clusters.py script. This script prompts you to pass in a list of features by which to group the data. By 
                    default, any groups containing fewer than 10 manuscripts are ignored (this threshold can be easily adjusted in the script). Those 
                    containing 10 or more manuscripts are output to separate, numbered csv files, one for each group.
                 
                 The groups were assessed by subject specialists to determine a) if the information on place of origin was significant, and b) if there 
                    were patterns that would allow us to hypothesise on the origins of manuscripts which lacked a firm provenance.
                 
                 
                   Example group showing the origplace value from the source data and the country value derived from it using the 
                      GeoPy library
                   Screenshot of a sample piece of TEI showing the recording of amendments.
                     
                 
             
             
               6.5 Integration of Results into Dataset
                 Where we had established a hypothetical provenance for a previously unplaced manuscript, we integrated this data back into the TEI record. 
                    Here we used a combination of TEI's @cert (certainty) attribute and the 
                    revisionDesc element to a) indicate a 
                    level of certainty for our hypothesis, and b) reference both the method and the data on which this hypothesis was founded. This stage was 
                    essential to one of the core aims of the project: to ensure that our own activities and methods were explicitly recorded in the dataset to 
                    inform future research. By default, TEI provides a limited range of values for @cert: low, medium and 
                    high. In this test project, we used the value medium by default, as we were not confident that the results of our processes 
                    could be classified as producing results with a high level of certainty, and where the correlation was tenuous we did not feed the results 
                    back into the dataset. It may be that a more granular approach to certainty would be necessary for a larger project with a broader range 
                    of results.
                 
                 
                   Integrating results into TEI record with a @cert attribute to indicate level of certainty.
                   Network visualisation of the connections between Cambridge's Islamicate manuscripts and Oxford's 
                     Western manuscripts
                     
                 
             
         

           7 Case Study: Persian and Indian Manuscripts in the Collection of the University of Manchester
             
               7.1 Collection and Cataloguing
                 Our test case was the University of Manchester collection, which was suitable both in terms of size (1,324 manuscript 
                    descriptions, so large enough for the testing of quantitative methods) and in terms of the richness of the descriptive records, having 
                    been the subject of a recent cataloguing project led by Jake Benson. The collection is also geographically diverse, 
                    spanning the Balkans to the Bay of Bengal , and so 
                    allowed us to test our theories on the automatic generation of provenance information.
                 
                 The collection also exhibited two other features general to Fihrist and to manuscript catalogues more widely. Firstly, the 
                    depth of description is not consistent across the collection, with manuscripts in Persian having richer records than manuscripts in Arabic 
                    and other languages. Secondly, cataloguing is a work in progress, based partly on new research and partly on legacy data derived from 
                    historical catalogues.
                 
                 Also of interest is that the physical collection itself has a complex provenance, originating in large part from the Crawford Collection 
                    of Alexander Lindsay, 25th Earl of Crawford (1812–1880), with later additions from the collections of 
                    Samuel Robinson of Wilmslow (1794–1884) and of manuscripts formerly held at Manchester's 
                    Chetham Library. The Crawford Collection, itself the product of the acquisition of several preceding collections, had been 
                    the subject of previous cataloguing activities: a descriptive handlist drawn up by Michael Kerney and a list of titles, 
                    authors, and scribes published in 1898 .
                 
             
             
               7.2 General Quantitative Analysis
                 This dataset provided us with the opportunity to test the efficacy of our grouping method in first identifying and then distinguishing 
                    between manuscripts which come from two closely related traditions: Indian and Iranian. We would expect manuscripts from these traditions 
                    to share many features, such as script and language, but our proposition was that codicological information might allow us to hypothesise 
                    about which unplaced manuscripts belong to which tradition.
                 
                 Of the 1,324 manuscript records in the dataset, 324 have a place of origin recorded. Of these, 190 are recorded as originating in 
                    India (59% of placed manuscripts) and 38 from Iran (12% of placed manuscripts). This might lead us to assume 
                    that of the 1,000 unplaced manuscripts, c.590 would be likely to be of Indian origin and c.120 of Iranian origin. However, it may, for 
                    example, be that the larger number of manuscripts recorded as being from India are not a reflection of general patterns in 
                    the collection but of a range of other factors, such as: a) it being easier to identify Indian manuscripts from textual or other data, 
                    b) an expertise in the identification of Indian manuscripts on behalf of the cataloguers who have described the collection, and/or c) 
                    extra attention being paid to the cataloguing of Indian manuscripts for funding or institutional reasons. While they do not help us 
                    directly in predicting the origin place of manuscripts, these overall statistical features of the dataset come in useful when assessing 
                    the significance of patterns which emerge in the grouping stage.
                 
                 There are 66 manuscripts recorded as originating in Syria, but the catalogue information for these is too thin for them to 
                    effectively group — a common problem in the dataset as a whole, discussed below. There are a handful of manuscripts recorded as 
                    originating in other contexts: 4 from Afghanistan, 8 from Britain, 4 from Pakistan, 10 from 
                    Turkey, and 1 from Uzbekistan. It is worth noting that the Geolocation API's allocation of manuscripts with 
                    more general origin places (such as Indian Subcontinent) to India rather than to 
                    Pakistan highlights general issues with the translation of historical areas to modern nation states. The same issue applies 
                    to the allocation of manuscripts recorded as originating in the Ottoman Empire to Turkey — we 
                    address these issues and offer some possible strategies in Section 9.
                 
                 Looking more closely at the data for Iranian and Indian manuscripts, information relating to text and language follows the pattern we 
                    would expect: 99% of Indian manuscripts are in Farsi (one manuscript is in Pashto), and 100% of Iranian manuscripts are in Farsi, 
                    reflecting the Mughal Empire's adoption of Persian as a state language. Script follows the same general pattern of similarity across the 
                    traditions:
                 
                   
                     
                       Script
                       India
                       Iran
                     
                     
                       Naskh
                       9%
                       21%
                     
                     
                       Nasta-liq
                       86%
                       76%
                     
                     
                       Shikastah
                       3%
                       0%
                     
                     
                       No value
                       3%
                       2%
                     
                 
                 
                 What was less encouraging for our specific research question was that the same patterns of similarity were reflected in the codicological 
                    information. 100% of both sets of manuscripts were on paper, making material (recorded at this level of granularity) essentially an 
                    irrelevant field in the grouping process. Almost all manuscripts across the traditions had a portrait orientation (95% in both cases). The 
                    traditions also exhibited very similar patterns in terms of the size of the manuscript and the number of lines per page:
                 
                   
                     
                       Size
                       India
                       Iran
                     
                     
                       Small
                       16%
                       18%
                     
                     
                       Medium
                       71%
                       66%
                     
                     
                       Large
                       8%
                       11%
                     
                     
                       No value
                       5%
                       5%
                     
                     
                       Number of Lines
                       India
                       Iran
                     
                     
                       1-10
                       5%
                       2%
                     
                     
                       11-20
                       49%
                       50%
                     
                     
                       21 plus
                       27%
                       34%
                     
                     
                       No value
                       19%
                       14%
                     
                 
                 
                 The only codicological feature where there was a notable difference between the two traditions was the number of manuscripts which were 
                    recorded as being decorated, with 68% of Iranian manuscripts recorded as decorated compared to only 29% of Indian manuscripts.
                 
             
             
               7.3 Grouping
                 With the exception of decoration, the individual codicological features, taken one by one, did not show notable differences between the 
                    two traditions. However, the grouping process gave us a chance to establish whether combinations of features (for instance small, 
                    decorated manuscripts with 11-20 lines per page) were more effective in distinguishing between manuscripts from India and 
                    Iran.
                 
                 Informed by the general quantitative analysis, we ran the grouping script with 5 parameters: script, decorated, orientation, lines, 
                    and size (leaving out material and language which nearly always returned the same values for the two traditions). This produced 7 groups 
                    representing sets of 10 or more manuscript records which shared identical values for all of these features. Of the 1,324 records in the 
                    dataset, 169 (or 13%) were represented in the output groups — with other records either forming groups of fewer than 10 or lacking the 
                    necessary information to be included in the grouping process.
                 
                 At first glance, the process seemed to be effective in identifying records relating to manuscripts which were from one of the two 
                    traditions (e.g., manuscripts that were either from India or Iran). Of the 169 records 
                    which formed groups of 10 or more, 136 had a place of origin recorded, with the majority from India (104) or 
                    Iran (25) and only a few from other countries (1 from Afghanistan, 1 from Pakistan, 3 from 
                    Turkey, and 1 from Uzbekistan), and 33 records lacking a place of origin. However, looking at cataloguing 
                    practices within the collection, it is possible that a major cause of this effect is the concentration of cataloguing activity on Persian 
                    and Indian material, leading to fuller records which are more likely to form into larger groupings.
                 
                 Comparing the subset of records within the output groups to the whole dataset, there are slightly increased baseline probabilities of 
                    manuscripts being recorded as originating in India (62% up from 59%) and Iran (15% up from 12%).
                 
                 Groups 1-7 contained manuscripts recorded as having the following features:
                 
                   
                     
                       Group #
                       Script
                       Mainlang
                       Decorated
                       Orientation
                       Lines
                       Size
                     
                     
                       Group 1
                       nasta_liq
                       fa
                       N
                       P
                       11_20
                       M
                     
                     
                       Group 2
                       nasta_liq
                       fa
                       N
                       P
                       11_20
                       S
                     
                     
                       Group 3
                       nasta_liq
                       fa
                       N
                       P
                       21_plus
                       L
                     
                     
                       Group 4
                       nasta_liq
                       fa
                       N
                       P
                       11_20
                       S
                     
                     
                       Group 5
                       nasta_liq
                       fa
                       Y
                       P
                       11_20
                       M
                     
                     
                       Group 6
                       nasta_liq
                       fa
                       Y
                       P
                       21_plus
                       L
                     
                     
                       Group 7
                       nasta_liq
                       fa
                       Y
                       P
                       21_plus
                       M
                     
                   
                   The manuscripts in Groups 1-7 are broken down by origin place below:
                   
                     
                       
                         Group #
                         Total Numberof Records
                         Afghanistan
                         India
                         Iran
                         Pakistan
                         Turkey
                         Uzbekistan
                         No PlaceRecorded
                       
                       
                         Group 1
                         53
                         1 (2%)
                         40 (75%)
                         2 (4%)
                         1 (2%)
                         0 (0%)
                         0 (0%)
                         8 (17%)
                       
                       
                         Group 2
                         13
                         0 (0%)
                         7 (54%)
                         3 (23%)
                         0 (0%)
                         2 (15%)
                         0 (0%)
                         1 (8%)
                       
                       
                         Group 3
                         14
                         0 (0%)
                         12 (86%)
                         0 (0%)
                         0 (0%)
                         0 (0%)
                         0 (0%)
                         2 (14%)
                       
                       
                         Group 4
                         19
                         1 (5%)
                         15 (79%)
                         0 (0%)
                         0 (0%)
                         1 (5%)
                         0 (0%)
                         2 (11%)
                       
                       
                         Group 5
                         40
                         0 (0%)
                         19 (48%)
                         10 (25%)
                         0 (0%)
                         1 (2%)
                         1 (2%)
                         9 (23%)
                       
                       
                         Group 6
                         14
                         0 (0%)
                         6 (43%)
                         7 (50%)
                         0 (0%)
                         1 (7%)
                         0 (0%)
                         0 (0%)
                       
                       
                         Group 7
                         15
                         0 (0%)
                         3 (20%)
                         0 (0%)
                         0 (0%)
                         0 (0%)
                         0 (0%)
                         3 (20%)
                       
                   
                 
             
         

           8 Assessment
             Against a baseline background probability of manuscripts in groups being recorded as coming from India (62%) or Iran 
                (15%), the groups do exhibit some clear tendencies. Manuscripts in Groups 1, 3, and 4 have a higher chance of being recorded as originating in 
                India (with Group 3 at 86% being at first glance the most compelling example), and manuscripts in Groups 2, 5, 6, and 7 have a 
                higher chance of being recorded as originating in Iran (Group 6 showing the strongest tendency at 50%). However, even for Groups 
                3 and 6, the size of the groups (14 manuscripts in each) makes it difficult to make a strong case for the generation of hypotheses on the 
                place of origin of unplaced manuscripts within these groups. This highlights the central problem with our analysis: the number of 
                catalogue records, even in a collection which has been the subject of a recent and comparatively large-scale cataloguing project, that have 
                sufficiently detailed codicological descriptions to form the basis of effective quantitative analysis.
             
             Two other factors are clear in our test dataset. The first is inconsistency in cataloguing practices — the most obvious examples being the 
                different terms for paper used in the records (chart and paper) and the mixed use of 
                both two- and three-letter language codes (e.g., fa and per). This is a wider 
                problem in the description of manuscripts. Bridget Whearty, discussing similar variability in descriptors for parchment 
                (parchment, parch, membrane, 
                vellum), references Ben Albritton's assertion that … manuscript studies, as a 
                field, is not interoperable with itself . The second is the concentration of cataloguing efforts 
                on certain parts of the collection, which then inevitably feature more heavily in the analysis — in this case, Iranian and Indian 
                manuscripts. As a result, our test case is a microcosm of the larger Fihrist dataset, where, despite documentation of practices 
                and the use of common standards, inconsistencies in the recording of values in the data are common, and there is enormous variability in the 
                depth of cataloguing even within the collections of single institutions.
             
             Even where rich data has been created, our efforts were hampered by a lack of granularity in the description of key codicological features. 
                For Islamicate manuscripts, the classification of manuscripts as being written on paper (or 
                chart, see above) is so broad as to be meaningless in terms of analysis, with 100% of manuscripts in our test 
                dataset exhibiting this feature. Other features, such as script or type of decoration would also benefit from more granular classification 
                schemes, such as those suggested by Déroche and Gacek , ; 
                see also the work on script classification done by . In some cases, such as the 
                descriptions of inks, seals, and bindings, prose descriptions are not accompanied by formal classification schemes, making it almost 
                impossible to include these features in computational analysis.
             
             For some features, such as origin place (crucial to our research question) there was, perhaps inevitably, a mixture of very broad categories 
                (e.g., Indian Subcontinent) and more specific terms (Delhi, 
                Lucknow, Isfahan), and the inclusion of values denoting 
                historical political entities (Mughal Empire, Safavid Empire, 
                Ottoman Empire) alongside modern national classifications (India, 
                Iran, Turkey). Issues regarding the derivation of 
                meaningful entities for computational analysis from historic place names have been discussed at length in the context of the 
                Pelagios project . While Pelagios has largely 
                focussed on resolving place names as they appear in text, rather than places which we assert as the sites of origins of manuscripts, there is 
                considerable overlap here as a number of origin places in our dataset are transcribed from colophons, stamps, or other text found in the 
                manuscript. Our problems here were compounded by the lack of a comprehensive use of a formal identifier scheme for places in the 
                Fihrist dataset. This led us to rely on automated conversion (using the GeoPy library) of the prose text in 
                originPlace elements into codes relating to modern nation states for the generation of consistent units for analysis. In addition to 
                a considerable error rate, this also raised the issue of the applicability of modern national boundaries to historical manuscript cultures. 
                Some possible approaches to this problem are discussed in Section 9.
              
             In common with the majority of catalogue datasets (and digital editions), Fihrist's current use of identifiers and vocabularies 
                concentrates mainly on the intellectual contents of the manuscripts rather than on their history or physical manifestation. It makes extensive 
                use of identifiers, both internal and external, for people and works — including VIAF identifiers where available. 
                Machine-readable forms of dates are given, and there has been some effort to be consistent in the recording of language codes (ISO two-letter 
                codes), the roles people have with regards to the manuscript (MARC relator codes), and material and script types (local schemes). However, 
                one of the results of our analysis was to highlight considerable variance of practice even in these limited areas. In addition to the need for 
                more granular vocabularies for material and scripts, as mentioned above, future work would benefit from similar controlled vocabularies or 
                identifier schemes for the description of other codicological featuresk, with decoration, binding, inks, and seals being just a few examples. 
                Put simply, if a feature is not consistently classified according to a controlled vocabulary, then even if it is described in detail it is 
                almost impossible to include it in any kind of quantitative analysis, and if these vocabularies or identifier schemes are not standard across 
                datasets, then the kind of large-scale comparative analysis promised by computational approaches becomes very difficult.
             
             Finally, it may be that alternative methodologies would give more promising results with limited and/or inconsistent data. One option would be 
                the application of multi-dimensional clustering to the dataset, which would give an idea of the importance of specific features in 
                establishing hypotheses about provenance and could lead to a more nuanced interpretation of the results of quantitative analysis based on the 
                weighting of particular features.
             
         

           9 Conclusions and Next Steps
             There is no doubt that computational approaches to manuscript catalogues have the potential to shed light, though perhaps not on the 
                things we might expect. The relationship between catalogues of manuscript collections and historical manuscript cultures is complex — and 
                catalogue data has much to tell us about the processes by which collections of manuscripts come to us in their present forms and about the 
                motivations and practices of those (including ourselves) who have created, described, and used those collections. The application of digital 
                methods to catalogue data also highlights some important general issues in data-driven digital humanities.
             
             In our project we used methods which went beyond simple inference or reference and looked at how patterns occurring in large datasets might 
                tell us new things about manuscript collections. The technical aspects of the project did not raise significant issues — TEI is more than 
                adequate as a data standard, the scripts work and do not in the first instance require complex coding in order to produce interesting 
                results. Rather, the issues lie in the data. There is the practical problem of assembling datasets that are rich enough and are at sufficient 
                scale to produce insights that would be impossible to obtain using traditional research methods. There is also the deeper issue of examining 
                the practices and motivations of collectors and cataloguers in order to give context to the results of quantitative methods.
             
               
                 9.1 Strategies for Partial and Inconsistent Datasets
                   While many of the data issues which became clear during the project point towards the need for changes in cataloguing practices in 
                      response to the requirements of digital methodologies (see Section 9.2 below), there are some practical steps that could be taken with 
                      the current dataset to improve the results of quantitative analysis in the short term.
                   
                   In the first instance, automated approaches to the identification and correction of inconsistencies in the data would produce a more 
                      reliable resource. One of the advantages of applying digital methodologies to datasets is that inconsistencies and errors of this kind 
                      tend to be highlighted at an early stage. Two examples that came up in the course of the project are the consistent use of two-letter 
                      language codes (e.g., fa rather than per) and attribute values for materials 
                      (e.g., paper rather than chart). Across the whole of the Fihrist 
                      dataset (c. 15,000 records), the identification and correction of inconsistencies arising either from mistakes in data entry or in 
                      variations in cataloguing practices is likely to make a significant difference in terms of the reliability of the results of 
                      quantitative analysis.
                   
                   Another possible strategy would be the use of natural language processing to extract standard attribute values from the textual 
                      content of elements. The project identified a number of fields where standardised attribute values were present but were not granular 
                      enough to be useful in quantitative analysis. The most striking example was paper, which was so ubiquitous 
                      in the dataset as to be almost useless in terms of categorising material. Similar problems were encountered with the values used for 
                      script and decoration. The textual content of the elements often provides additional information (for instance, on the type of paper or 
                      sub-categorisation of script) which could be drawn upon to generate a more specific and granular attribute value. The same logic would 
                      apply to the generation of new attribute values where none currently exists for fields likely to give important information about the 
                      provenance of manuscripts, such as seals, inks, and bindings. However, the use of natural language processing to auto-generate values at 
                      scale needs to be approached with caution, as the free text content of elements may contain nuances that require an understanding of the 
                      context of specific terms within a sentence or paragraph (e.g., distinguishing between cases where a manuscript is on 
                      European paper from cases where European paper has been used for repairs).
                   
                   One specific problem encountered in the project was the reconciliation of place names as recorded in the manuscripts with historical 
                      regions appropriate to our analysis. As described above, we used the GeoPy Python library to attempt to derive a broad idea of the 
                      regions of origin from the values recorded in the dataset. However, the returned values tended to reflect modern national boundaries, 
                      which were not always useful in the context of our research question. The building of project- or subject-specific gazetteers (along 
                      the lines of the Pelagios project) and/or the inclusion of suitable identifiers at the point of cataloguing 
                      are probably the best long-term strategies to address this problem (see Section 9.2 below), but for large sets of legacy data, automated 
                      reconciliation against existing resources could provide at least a partial solution. One possible route could be the Wikidata 
                      reconciliation functionality provided by tools such as OpenRefine, though we would then be relying both on the presence of the 
                      placenames in Wikidata and on the level of historical context provided in the entry. With similar caveats, automated reconciliation of 
                      values in the dataset against external resources could also be an option for other values in the dataset, such as scripts, seals, and 
                      materials. This would have the additional advantage of allowing us to automatically enrich our analyses with data from external 
                      sources.
                   
               
               
                 9.2 Suggestions for Cataloguing Practices
                   In terms of strategies for future cataloguing practices, the project highlighted two core issues: the sheer labour involved in creating 
                      complex data at scale and the inherent connection between data, method, and research question. These are neatly summed up by 
                      Ezio Ornato (our emphasis): … everything in a book is theoretically measurable, or, better yet, … 
                      each characteristic observed in a book may be formalized to extract measurable data from it, provided it is worth the 
                      effort. 
                   
                   Which leaves us with the question: worth the effort to do what? There are an infinite number 
                      of things you can record about pretty much any object — what you choose to record (and how you choose to record it) depends on what you 
                      want to find out. Manuscript cataloguing is a type of data modelling, and, as Flanders and Jannidis say, 
                       … the formalized model determines which aspects of the subject will be computable and in what form 
                      . Given an infinite number of possibilities, deciding on what is 
                      worth the effort to record relies on an idea of the purpose of the model — what we want to 
                      be computable and in what form. The blueprint of the model lies in the questions you want to ask.
                   
                   Our pilot project — with a single research question based around provenance — identified a number of areas where the data would need to 
                      be enriched or improved significantly in order to produce useful results (and this in a collection which has been the subject of a 
                      recent and well-funded cataloguing effort). It is likely that other research questions would make similar demands of the data. We have 
                      some idea of the effort involved in producing the kind of very rich catalogue data that lends itself to quantitative analysis. In the 
                      Cambridge context, the recent 
                      Polonsky Foundation Greek Manuscripts Project 
                      produced 422 very detailed catalogue records through the efforts of three full-time cataloguers over three years, and the current 
                      Curious Cures in Cambridge Libraries Project 
                      plans to produce (amongst other things) just over 180 similarly detailed catalogue records, including partial transcription, in two 
                      years with three part-time research positions. This kind of output requires not only effort but also a broad range of expertise. What 
                      useful strategies can we adopt to embark on work of this scale?
                   
                   We would advocate following the example of our pilot project in creating strong and explicit links between data creation and research 
                      questions. To go back to the provided it is worth the effort stipulation, all cataloguing 
                      activity is purpose driven, whether those purposes are explicit or not. By engaging in projects which are direct collaborations between 
                      researchers and cataloguers and therefore between data creation and research questions, we target our energies towards work that really 
                      is worth the effort and has a measurable way of assessing its value and efficacy.
                   
                   But don't we run the risk of creating a dataset that is only responsive to certain uses? Perhaps, but there are practical measures which 
                      can mitigate against the risks of producing data that is specifically geared to only one set of research questions. Collaborative and 
                      comparative work of the kind facilitated by digital approaches could do much to usefully standardise manuscript catalogue data, 
                      particularly in areas such as codicological description where there are fewer large standard vocabularies or identifier schemes than in 
                      prosopographical or textual studies.
                   
                   Our project identified several areas where there was a need either for more granular descriptive terms for physical aspects of 
                      manuscripts (material, scripts, decoration) or entirely new descriptive vocabularies (inks, seals, bindings). The development of 
                      standard vocabularies and/or identified schemes in these areas would not only address specific requirements arising from our project, 
                      but would also be more generally useful in addressing other research questions. The extent to which such vocabularies or identifiers 
                      would be able to span different manuscript cultures (Islamicate, Western European, Sanskrit, etc.) and create compatible datasets for 
                      interdisciplinary study is an interesting question that raises important issues fundamental to the aims, methods, and purposes of 
                      manuscript description.
                   
                   As discussed in Section 5.2, much of our data modelling work centres around our involvement in the collaborative development of a 
                      consolidated schema for manuscript description. The embedding of standard vocabularies arising from research projects into the schema 
                      would not only address the practical needs of projects engaged in quantitative analysis of manuscript descriptions, but also act as a 
                      forum for discussion of general issues arising from those projects — particularly the potential for quantitative analysis that spans 
                      different manuscript cultures and the kind of data models and standard vocabularies that would be required to embark on work of this 
                      type.
                   
               
               
                 9.3 Manuscript Catalogues as the Focus of Research
                   While the automated correction and enrichment of datasets and changes to cataloguing practices would certainly improve the results of 
                      computational methods, our project highlights fundamental problems surrounding the correlation of the results of quantitative analysis 
                      with the realities of historical manuscript cultures. This raises the question: if quantitative approaches to manuscript catalogues are 
                      not well suited to establishing hard facts about historical manuscript cultures, then what are they good for?
                   
                   To return to Ornato, one perspective on manuscript catalogues is as multi-layered representations of what people have 
                      thought it worth the effort to record about manuscript collections over time. If we aim to 
                      draw conclusions about the realities of historical manuscript culture directly from catalogue data, this can present a challenge. 
                      If, however, catalogues and their formation are framed as integral to our research questions, then they present an enormously useful 
                      resource for the understanding of changing attitudes towards manuscript collections, as well as serving as a mirror to contemporary 
                      social and political attitudes.
                   
                   Our own work in the creation and curation of datasets derived from manuscript catalogues can be illuminating in this context. Many of 
                      the data issues raised by our pilot project centred around four core activities: selection, identification, authority, and method. 
                      We select which features we want to describe, we identify those features according to a typology or classification scheme, we indicate, 
                      explicitly or implicitly, by what authority we make this assertion, and this whole process happens in the context of method — current or 
                      anticipated use of the data. Viewing manuscript catalogues in this light has practical advantages in terms of understanding the results 
                      of quantitative methods by putting them in the context of the situations and motivations that produced them. In this we would argue 
                      against Drucker's distinction between the identification of trends in the data against 
                      phenomena in the actual and lived world . Data are phenomena of the 
                      actual and lived world and deserve our attention as such. A catalogue record for a manuscript is just as real as the manuscript 
                      itself.
                   
                   Our project raised several potential research avenues in this area. In selecting our sample dataset, the inconsistency of depth and 
                      detail of description across the corpus became apparent — both between manuscript catalogues and within single catalogues themselves. 
                      Even in our sample dataset, there was a distinct difference between the level of information recorded about manuscripts written in 
                      Persian and other parts of the collection. An analysis of the relationship between types of material and level of detail recorded might 
                      produce interesting insights both at the micro and macro level, allowing us to trace the interests and specialities of individual 
                      cataloguers within catalogues and to analyse broader cultural and historical patterns of interest and engagement (including patterns in 
                      contemporary funding of collection description).
                   
                   In addition to providing information on manuscripts, catalogues are also texts with their own historical and cultural context. The use 
                      of language in catalogues of Islamicate collections could be a valuable resource for allowing us to trace European attitudes to the Near 
                      and Middle East over time. A useful study could also be made of the type of person who was involved in the cataloguing of 
                      collections and by what authority (institutional, academic or cultural) they made their assertions about the manuscripts. Of 
                      particular interest here would be the identification of lost voices in the catalogues, including native speakers who made 
                      unacknowledged contributions to the work.
                   
                   It would also be interesting to turn the focus back on ourselves and our own work. Decolonisation is often framed in terms of 
                      fixing historical biases in data, but it would be valuable to take a more reflective and critical stance on the meaning and 
                      purposes of decolonisation as it relates to our project. Description and classification rely on sets of rules, and as 
                      Daston argues, the island[s] of stability and predictability created by rule-sets are 
                      ... the arduous and always fragile achievement of political will, technological infrastructure and internalized 
                      norms . Brown and Davis-Brown point to the political nature of 
                      this achievement, arguing that ...classifications never emerge solely from the 
                      material to be classified since our ways of defining the material itself are shaped by the dominant intellectual or political paradigms 
                      through which we view it  — with our own classifications no exception. As we 
                      try to put the sources upon which our conclusions are based into their historical context, it is crucial that we acknowledge the 
                      dominant intellectual or political paradigms which shape our own activities.
                   
               
               
                 9.4 Data Models, Digital Humanities, and Decolonisation
                   Data models and data modelling were central to many aspects of our project. The creation of the TEI dataset that formed the basis of our 
                      analysis was an act of data modelling, as was our own manipulation of the data in preparation for analysis. The legacy data that makes 
                      up much of the dataset has its own models, which encapsulate particular mindsets and attitudes and anticipate particular approaches. 
                      Data models in manuscript catalogues tend to divide collections into categories that are the embodiment of colonial classifications, 
                      such as the grouping of materials originating in diverse geographical contexts under the label Oriental. They also often claim 
                      authority over the content without referencing indigenous sources or contributions. Finally, they tend to anticipate that the study of 
                      different manuscript cultures will be undertaken separately, mitigating against interdisciplinary approaches across traditions. 
                      Digital data models often replicate these mindsets rather than challenging them.
                   
                   We see an opportunity in the digital context to embark on data modelling activities that address decolonisation from a data-driven 
                      perspective. As we have seen, data modelling is not just about preparing content for publication and analysis; data modelling also 
                      frames what it is possible to do with the data. By using text encoding we can create descriptions that are based on conceptual models 
                      rather than strict hierarchies and formulations, and by working collaboratively across disciplines we can use this flexibility to create 
                      data that is inclusive and interoperable. We also advocate an open approach both to data availability and licensing which opens it up to 
                      audiences beyond the academic sphere — though there are real issues around the need for documentation, technology, skills, and 
                      infrastructure for new audiences to make use of the data.
                   
                   In practical terms, this means moving away from traditional data models and towards structures, vocabularies, and identifiers that allow 
                      us to capture the individual characteristics of different manuscript traditions, while also facilitating interdisciplinary and 
                      comparative approaches. This is partly encapsulated in our collaborative work on the schema, but it also extends towards the 
                      establishment and use of vocabularies and identifier schemes — in particular a move towards taxonomies, which can group related 
                      phenomena together using numerical identifiers rather than relying on domain-specific language and terminology. A good example of the 
                      potential of these approaches was an analysis we undertook of the intellectual network of authorship of manuscripts from 
                      Cambridge's Islamicate collections and Oxford's Western medieval manuscripts (see Figure 5). This relied not 
                      only on these collections sharing a data model, but also on their use of VIAF identifiers, which allowed us to resolve the 
                      identity of authors who had been described in very different ways in the legacy data from which the datasets were constructed.
                   
                   
                     Network visualisation of authors in the Fihrist and Medieval 
                       Manuscripts in Oxford Libraries datasets, using Stanford University's 
                        Palladio software.
                     
                       
                   
                   Finally, a note on data provenance. This project originated with questions about the origins of manuscripts, but the origins of data 
                      turned out to be equally if not more important. We have talked about the value of addressing the context in which legacy data was 
                      produced, and we also need to extend the same mechanisms to our own data modelling activities. Practically speaking, this means adopting 
                      a transparent and non-hierarchical model of recording contributions directly into the data, whether they be by people or by processes, 
                      and taking advantage of the versioning capabilities of modern repositories to record the various stages in the development of our 
                      datasets. As well as fostering a collaborative and iterative approach, this should mean that people using the data for similar projects 
                      in the future will have a more solid foundation for their analyses and a better idea of their point of departure.
                   
               
           

             Funding and Acknowledgements
               This work was funded under the Cambridge Humanities Research Grants scheme. The Fihrist/OCIMCO catalogue was originally funded 
                  by JISC. Data cleanup and enrichment preparatory to the work was funded by Cambridge Digital Humanities. The Fihrist platform 
                  is hosted and maintained by the Bodleian Libraries, Oxford.
               
           
