Title:  The 
Volume:  011
Issue:  3
Date:  02 October 2017
Abstract:  
                
                Since 2014, The Map of Early Modern London (MoEML) has partnered with professors and students
                    around the world in a unique collaboration between a digital humanities (DH)
                    project and humanities classrooms. The model we have developed addresses a
                    sustainability challenge for DH projects, provides professors with a way of
                    meeting administrative demands for engaged learning, and gives students a
                    high-stakes research-based learning opportunity with the potential for an
                    open-access, peer–reviewed publication. The MoEML
                    Pedagogical Partnership Project emerged from a confluence of problems and
                    opportunities. One longstanding problem for DH practitioners is project-based:
                    how do we sustain the projects already begun? Another problem emerges as DH
                    moves out of the big tent and sets up camp in humanities
                    classrooms at smaller, non-R1 institutions. Also, for scholars not trained in
                    the technologies that drive many DH projects, crossing the analog-digital divide
                    might be daunting and discourage them from contributing to DH projects. To
                    address these challenges, the MoEML Pedagogical
                    Partnership takes Research-Based Learning (RBL) models and turns them into
                    high-profile publication opportunities, mobilizing ubiquitous social networking
                    and communication technologies to connect the project with the new demographic
                    of student contributors. This essay will highlight how digital projects and
                    digi-curious professors can collaborate to develop innovative pedagogical
                    practices that provide projects with content, enliven professors’ pedagogy, and
                    invite students to acquire scholarly research skills, gain digital literacy, and
                    engage in an interdisciplinary and international collaboration. We argue that DH
                    projects can be used innovatively and effectively in the classroom to promote
                    RBL. At the same time, DH projects–open-access ones in particular–can provide a
                    home both for humanities research and for the fruits of digital pedagogy across
                    a wide range of institutional settings.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                Since 2014, The Map of Early Modern London has
                    partnered with professors and students around the world in a unique
                    collaboration between a digital humanities (DH) project and humanities
                    classrooms. The model we have developed addresses a sustainability challenge for
                    DH projects, provides professors with a way of meeting administrative demands
                    for engaged learning, and gives students a high-stakes research-based learning
                    opportunity with the potential for an open-access, peer-reviewed publication.
                    The MoEML Pedagogical Partnership Project emerged
                    from a confluence of problems and opportunities. One longstanding problem for DH
                    practitioners is project-based: how do we sustain the projects already begun?
                    Another problem emerges as DH moves out of the big tent and
                    sets up camp in humanities classrooms. We refer, of course, to the theme
                        of the 2011 Digital Humanities conference at Stanford: Big Tent Digital Humanities. A complaint about DH is
                    that it requires infrastructure and support and is therefore inaccessible to the 
                        ‘have-nots’ of the mainstream humanities
                        
                    . Even if newcomers do have the resources to build something new (thereby
                    adding to the number of projects requiring curation and care), must they do so
                    in order to be doing DH? Another problem faces potential contributors to DH
                    projects: crossing the analog-digital divide can be daunting for scholars not
                    trained in the technologies that drive many DH projects. Projects and
                    contributors share the need to disseminate and mobilize scholarship. Academic
                    faculty are increasingly enjoined to publish in open-access fora, which
                    increases the need for reputable digital venues. We also need to capture the
                    original work of students, for whom the processes of scholarly publishing
                    (regardless of medium) can be alienating.
                To address these challenges, the MoEML Pedagogical
                    Partnership takes Research-Based Learning (RBL) models and turns them into
                    high-profile publication opportunities, mobilizing ubiquitous social networking
                    and communication technologies to connect the project with the new demographic
                    of student contributors. For collaborators in classrooms around the world,
                        MoEML’s challenges become opportunities.
                    Similarly, challenges in the humanities become opportunities for MoEML. This essay will highlight how digital projects
                    and digi-curious professors can collaborate to develop innovative pedagogical
                    practices that provide projects with content, enliven professors’ pedagogy, and
                    invite students to acquire scholarly research skills, gain digital literacy, and
                    engage in an interdisciplinary and international collaboration. We argue that DH
                    projects can be used innovatively and effectively in the classroom to promote
                    RBL. At the same time, DH projects–open-access ones in particular–can provide a
                    home both for humanities research and for the fruits of digital pedagogy across
                    a wide range of institutional settings.
            

                The Problems
                
                    DH Project Sustainability
                    In the seventeen years since MoEML’s inception
                        as an intranet pedagogical tool, the project has developed multiple
                        resources that are far from completion: the first is a descriptive Gazetteer
                        of over one-thousand streets, sites, administrative units, and other
                        features; the second is a Library of texts that are crucial to our
                        understanding of early modern literary London but are rarely anthologized or
                        have never been edited at all. As the MoEML
                        team turned its attention to building the best possible platform–adding a
                        digital edition of the Agas map with built-in drawing tools, enabling GIS
                        capabilities, linking to Google Maps, working with other projects to
                        geolocate their data, and compiling finding aids and bibliographies–the core
                        resources of the site remained unfinished. This problem is not unique to
                            MoEML. See the position papers in
                                Done? Finishing Projects in the Digital
                                Humanities, a special cluster in Digital Humanities Quarterly, 3.2 (2009), edited by Matthew
                            Kirschenbaum. Note that it is not a problem of mission
                                creep for MoEML, which was
                            designed from its inception to be large and was created with hundreds of
                            empty placeholder pages. Jenstad’s students at the University of
                        Windsor anticipated as long ago as 2002 that finishing MoEML would require the world to help. Two prescient students
                        (Michael Davis and Tara Drouillard) suggested that Jenstad invite
                        contributions from other classrooms, an idea that she found inspiring but
                        unachievable in 2002.
                
                
                    Engaged Learning and the Knowledge Mobilization Challenge
                    DH projects not only need to determine how to sustain themselves, but are
                        also expected (by funding bodies and university administrators) to make
                        their work accessible to the wider public. Understandably, public funding
                        agencies, such as SSHRC (Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council) in
                        Canada or the NEH (National Endowment for the Humanities) in the US, want
                        scholars to give something back to taxpayers whose money supports their
                        projects. Digital Humanists might be more comfortable than other humanists
                        with online, open-access publications, but simply putting research on the
                        web is not enough. Furthermore, professors of all stripes are increasingly
                        being asked to mobilize knowledge, make it public, and quantify its impact
                        while also engaging students in meaningful research. In the twenty years
                        since the Boyer Commission’s report was published, we have seen calls for
                        research-intensive courses, capstone courses, and undergraduate research
                        scholarships across the disciplines and in institutions of all sizes. It has
                        been imposed by well-meaning administrators on faculty members without (in
                        some cases) much guidance about how to invite students into the research
                        process or how to mobilize research for the public good. We are not
                        accustomed to expecting original research from undergraduate students, even
                        though we can offer them access to primary texts, archival materials, and
                        tools that were unimaginable even ten years ago. Even with these new
                        resources, some of us find it hard to imagine innovative ways to get our
                        undergraduates involved in an historic research model that has generally
                        been conducted by lone scholars working in an archive and then writing up
                        their findings. The essays in Hackel and Moulton’s Teaching Early Modern Literature from the
                                Archives respond to the challenge of getting students
                            involved in archival research . An
                        obvious solution to this challenge is to get more scholars involved in RBL
                        and DH work. How can we reach across to our fellow teachers, especially
                        those lacking technological skillsets, and invite them to contribute their
                        expertise to a digital project?
                
            

                The Solution
                For over ten years, Jenstad incubated the idea put forward by her students in
                    2002. Certain material conditions had to pertain before she could develop the
                    Pedagogical Partnership she envisioned: grant funding, a team of research
                    assistants, and a collaborator (McLean-Fiander). But the key impetus to launch
                    the Partnership came from faculty members outside DH who had been charged with
                    doing undergraduate research in the classroom and mobilizing student
                    scholarship. A 2013 exchange on Facebook and email between Peter Herman at San
                    Diego State University (SDSU) and Jenstad at the University of Victoria (UVic)
                    catalyzed the transformation of the 2002 Windsor students’ idea into the reality
                    of MoEML’s current Pedagogical Partnership. Herman
                    wrote that he was teaching a very small seminar the following semester that was
                    supposed to focus on undergraduate research. He wanted to go beyond Early English Books Online (EEBO), which he had been using successfully in the undergraduate
                    classroom , and asked Jenstad if she had any
                    innovative ideas about using MoEML in some way. The
                    timing was ideal. With McLean-Fiander having recently joined the MoEML team, we had conceived the idea of starting a pilot project whereby we team up with professors in
                        other locations, supply teaching materials, and have the students contribute
                        to MoEML under the close supervision of their
                        professor on site. Jenstad wrote to Herman that 
                        We are keen to honour our pedagogical origins while
                            upholding scholarly standards. We think it’s a win-win-win-win
                            proposition. MoEML needs contributors and
                            reviewers. Because MoEML is rapidly growing
                            beyond my capacity to edit every entry submitted, I need to delegate
                            some of the work. Your student gets a publication for his/her CV or
                            graduate school application. You would be credited as Guest
                                Editor and would have an innovative teaching partnership
                            to add to your teaching dossier.
                        
                    Herman’s response–that the project was 
                        exactly what the administrators around here
                            [want]
                        
                    –confirmed that such a partnership had the potential to meet a new demand
                    in academia.
                In its current form, the partnership is an innovative, scalable, extensible model
                    for teachers, student researchers, and digital humanities projects. MoEML provides teaching materials for the module,
                    research guidance, and a high-profile publication opportunity for the class.
                    Professors work closely with students in their classes to produce a publishable
                    encyclopedia entry, edit an early modern text, and/or learn to transcribe and
                    encode text. MoEML gains an edited,
                    externally-sourced contribution, and builds a base of educated users who may
                    well contribute in the future. Calling on the crowd is one way to complete large
                    projects. Managing the crowd and maintaining standards have always been the
                    challenges, however . In this partnership, the
                    professor functions like the Guest Editor of a journal issue, responsible for
                    vetting the content before it comes to the MoEML
                    team; in this way, MoEML distributes the management
                    of the crowd and delegates a certain amount of quality control. 
                
                    The DH Part of the Solution
                     Including a MoEML module in a course does not
                        necessarily involve teaching DH directly, but it can provide DH skills and
                        model DH values outside a formal DH curriculum. It allows partners to teach
                        robust research skills while using digital resources and/or writing for the
                        digital environment. The MoEML module teaches
                        student participants to write for a different medium (the web). Because we
                        cite preferentially from open-access resources, students at large
                        institutions learn to look beyond subscription resources while students from
                        smaller institutions (without journal and database subscriptions) find that
                        they are not disadvantaged in the research process. Thus, the partnership
                        promotes the new models of dissemination pioneered by DH practitioners
                        (open-access, Creative Commons licensing, new models of peer review) and
                        brings attention to projects that may not be indexed in library catalogues.
                        The high visibility of the module invites students to do their best work.
                        The complexity of the projects demands collaboration, a hallmark of DH.
                        Different people bring different skills to the table. Some students will be
                        wizards with certain aspects of technology that may well be daunting for
                        their professors. Thus, the module compresses and occasionally inverts
                        hierarchies, another hallmark of both DH work and RBL.
                
                
                    The RBL Part of the Solution
                    In its 1998 white paper, Reinventing Undergraduate
                            Education: A Blueprint for America’s Research Universities, the
                        Boyer Commission on Educating Undergraduates in the Research University
                        recommended that RBL become the model of learning at R1 universities . The Boyer Commission’s Blueprint uses the
                            designation R1, a now-deprecated category in the Carnegie Classification of
                            Institutions of Higher Education. There is no single equivalent term in
                            the new ontology, which is more granular and less value-laden. We will
                            use the still-popular R1 designation for polemical purposes. See  for a description of the
                            somewhat later UK adoption of RBL practices. RBL entails inviting
                        students into a community of learners where the instructor and the students
                        are all pursuing an unanswered question together 
                        . The professor is neither the sage on the stage
                        nor the guide on the side but a fellow
                        investigator who offers mentorship to an apprentice investigator. RBL offers
                        students a high-stakes learning opportunity, gives them tools to ask and
                        answer legitimate questions, cultivates a spirit of collaboration, and
                        allows them to take ownership of the knowledge they produce 
                        . Model RBL opportunities include lab work,
                        fieldwork, internships, capstone courses, undergraduate research awards,
                        research scholarships, and course modules . RBL
                        is a natural fit for the Sciences and Social Sciences: disciplines with
                        teams working in laboratory settings or doing fieldwork regularly . In the humanities, DH projects and
                        laboratories have the potential to offer RBL opportunities. MoEML began in 1999 as an RBL exercise, and has
                        inspired and hosted further RBL projects since then. See, for example,
                            two Digital Humanities directed readings hosted by MoEML: DHUM 491: Remediating Bills of Mortality (http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/DHUM491_2015.htm) and DHUM 491: Georeferencing London Books (http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/DHUM491_2014.htm). 
                
                
                    Reimagining RBL through DH Pedagogy
                    MoEML stands at the intersection of two distinct
                        pressures: to provide RBL opportunities and to respond to the impact of the
                        digital revolution upon humanities research questions. The pedagogical
                        partnership reimagines the apprentice-researcher model of RBL and the
                        project-based model of DH. For good reason, RBL tends to happen at R1
                        institutions and DH tends to happen at places with centres: both are
                        research and resource intensive. A typical objection to RBL is that it is
                        difficult to practice in small institutions that do not have extensive
                        library, technical, or infrastructural resources. Critics have said the same
                        of DH . The two objections to RBL and DH
                        have tended to be mutually reinforcing. In UVic’s Maker Lab in the
                        Humanities (dir. Jentery Sayers), for example, RAs develop Kits for
                            Culture. Maker Lab in the Humanities. Dir. Jentery Sayers.
                            University of Victoria. http://maker.uvic.ca/.  However, such opportunities
                        are not course-based and depend upon a funded lab for support. At MoEML, we provide comparable opportunities to
                        students undertaking Directed Readings (for course credit) or Jamie Cassels
                        Undergraduate Research Awards (scholarships to conduct original research
                        with a faculty member). Again, however, these are elite opportunities
                        predicated on competitive funding, lab/project space, and supervisorial good
                        will. 
                    Our own project is well supported at UVic by the Humanities Computing and
                        Media Centre (HCMC), and we have enjoyed generous SSHRC funding (2012-2016).
                        The pedagogical partnership permits MoEML to
                        become a virtual lab shared by all our partners. They use our bibliography,
                        gazetteer, praxis guidelines, encoding protocols, and mapping tools. In
                        addition, we are available to provide guidance on research agendas. Just as
                        RBL is usually an instance of a student picking a small aspect of the
                        researcher’s larger research question, our pedagogical partners and their
                        students can develop a subset of research questions within the broader
                        framework of the research questions that MoEML
                        addresses.
                    The digital revolution also makes RBL more feasible across a wider range of
                        institutions. In the humanities, RBL might entail working with primary
                        materials linked to professors’ research projects. Such materials lend
                        themselves to digitization, and are, in fact, being digitized at a rapid
                        rate because they tend to be housed in libraries, which are rightly leading
                        the charge in digitizing the very kinds of data that humanities scholars
                        generally analyze (books, letters, records, images, art). See  for analysis of how the digital revolution
                            enables the teaching of digital skills in an archives and
                                public history curriculum. Like us, they have found that
                            students bring different levels of technological expertise to the new
                            array of RBL projects that are enabled by the digital revolution.
                        Our fieldwork used to take place in libraries; now it takes place on the
                        internet. MoEML itself provides many
                        open-access resources but we also point people preferentially to other
                        open-access resources. 
                
            

                MoEML and the Pedagogical Partnership
                
                    Methodology
                    The MoEML Pedagogical Partnerships make four key
                        assumptions: 
                    
                        Research-based learning is now possible at any institution, not just
                            the former R1 institutions, thanks to the burgeoning of digital
                            resources, in particular open-access ones.
                        Providing students with high-stakes publishing opportunities will
                            motivate them to produce their best work.
                        Their best work is often an original contribution to
                                scholarship. It has certainly been Jenstad’s experience that
                                students can produce original research results, particularly if they
                                are working with little-known texts or newly surfaced materials.
                                Within the project environment too, as Jenstad and Takeda describe,
                                RAs do much more than acquire the technical skills to carry out the
                                Director’s agenda; they create new technologies in response to real
                                humanities problems like how to deal with the profusion of
                                conflicting calendrical systems in the early modern period .
                        The imperatives of knowledge mobilization and publicly funded
                            education demand that we capture students’ original
                            research and share it within and beyond the scholarly community.
                    
                    Broadly speaking, the MoEML module has two
                        phases. The first phase–teaching, assigning, and assessing–occurs during the
                        term at our partner institutions. As noted by the Student Collaborators’ Bill of Rights, a professor who assigns
                        a MoEML module 
                            must primarily consider the student’s own
                                intellectual growth
                            
                         rather than the needs of the project. MoEML is not involved in the grading, which has to conform to
                        the partner institution’s assessment standards. Once the Partnership is
                        established and before the course begins, the project and the professor
                        discuss the nature of the contribution. The contribution needs to help
                        students achieve the learning outcomes for the course. In keeping with RBL
                        practices, the contribution must be relevant to the professor’s own research
                        questions and expertise. It must also fit the project’s needs; for MoEML, the pressing needs are encyclopedia
                        articles for the Placeography, essays on topics of general interest to
                            MoEML users, and editions of texts for the
                        Library. The project supplies some teaching materials. During the term, the
                        students research the assigned topic and write an encyclopedia article or
                        create an edition under the close supervision of the professor who acts as
                        an on-site MoEML Guest Editor.
                    For our 2014 pilot of the Pedagogical Partnership, we teamed up with Herman
                        at SDSU and Kathryn R. McPherson at Utah Valley University. Both professors
                        chose to have the entire class work together to complete a single MoEML Encyclopedia article that needed content:
                        Herman was assigned the Blackfriars Theatre and McPherson’s the Curtain
                        Theatre. MoEML provided a blurb about the
                        Partnership for their syllabi; suggested forms of assessment that had worked
                        for Jenstad in the past; provided a comprehensive online guide for student
                        researchers; visited their classes in person and/or by Skype; regularly
                        checked in with them via email; sent sources; and helped with refining
                        topics, developing models for group work, and reviewing an early draft (in
                        Herman’s case).
                    The second phase–preparing the submission for MoEML publication–occurs after the course is over and grades
                        are submitted. Not all students want to continue working on a project after
                        the course is finished (although many have done so), which means that they
                        will not experience the full cycle of academic feedback, revision, and
                        publication. Nevertheless, their work is still subject to the peer review
                        process through the mediation of the professor (credited as Guest
                            Editor), who has to revise the students’ work after the
                        students have moved on. Depending on the extent of the revisions required,
                        the Guest Editor may effectively co-author the contribution. Most academic
                        writing is better because of the suggestions and interventions of peer
                        reviewers, editors, and copyeditors–people who are often uncredited. MoEML consults the Guest Editor about how credit
                        should be apportioned and described in contribution metadata. MoEML then reviews, encodes, and publishes the
                        article.
                
                
                    The Results: A Winning Model?
                    We hoped that this model would benefit all the participants: the Guest
                        Editors/professors, the students, and the project. Professors
                        would get an innovative teaching experience to include on their professional
                        dossiers. They would be able to engage their students in meaningful
                        research. Perhaps more importantly, professors who had been tasked with
                        incorporating digital tools and methods in the classroom would now have a
                        methodology. They would still be rooted in their own scholarly domain and
                        subject area as they taught scholarly research skills to their students, but
                        they would also get to offer their students pathways into digital
                        scholarship via the MoEML module. In effect,
                        the Partnership would offer them one of the 
                            easy ways to dip [their] toe[s] into the field [of
                                digital scholarship]
                            
                        . Furthermore, they would now be free to experiment with classroom
                        power dynamics, allowing students who might be particularly technologically
                        savvy to take leadership roles. Indeed, MoEML
                        would provide a solution to some of the problems that digital pedagogues
                        have historically faced. Konkol outlines these problems . We hoped that MoEML could model 
                            the kind of non-hierarchical collaborative work
                                that bridges the erroneous distinctions drawn between pedagogy and
                                research
                            
                        . The Student Collaborators’ Bill of
                            Rights notes that 
                            At their best, these partnerships are a way for
                                students to learn new skills and benefit from mentorship, while more
                                seasoned scholars can learn from junior scholars’ ideas, skills,
                                subject knowledge, and perspectives
                            
                        .
                    Ideally, students would learn that they are not only consumers
                        of knowledge but can also be producers or creators of knowledge .  They would feel part of something that is
                        bigger than themselves. While mastering scholarly research methods, such as
                        using online databases, academic journals, and checking and citing sources
                        properly, they would come to feel like scholars, and the experience would
                        push them to take their research skills to the next level. Having a venue
                        like MoEML would provide them with an audience
                        to write for and show them that there can be real purpose to scholarly
                        writing since their work would have a genuine utility for other scholars.
                        Their work researching for MoEML would be
                        formative, especially for those who planned to go on to graduate school with
                        the intention of entering the profession. They would not only learn more
                        about the early modern world, but also become better researchers and
                        collaborators. 
                    Finally, the hope was that the project would acquire vetted
                        scholarly content that would help to sustain a pedagogical resource used by
                        thousands around the world. While expanding our content, we could achieve
                        greater quality assurance by having Guest Editors vet contributions. This
                        method would also take some of the strain off our in-house editors.
                
            

                Refinements, Lessons Learned, Improvements
                MoEML and partners have tested this model in a
                    variety of ways: public feedback, extension of the model, and role-switching.
                    During the pilot term (Spring 2014), we sought feedback from scholars and
                    potential contributors via demonstrations (most notably at the Shakespeare
                    Association of America [SAA] Digital Salon), social media (Facebook, Twitter,
                    and our own on-site News feed), and on-site visits. McLean-Fiander did a
                            MoEML Road Show in
                    southern California, visiting Herman’s class in person while there. We have
                    since given conference papers, presented in panel sessions, organized a Modern
                    Language Association (MLA) panel, and run a workshop at the SAA.
                
                    Feedback from Professors Other feedback on the Pedagogical
                            Partnership is available here: http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/feedback.htm
                    Informal feedback from Pedagogical Partners has been highly or wholly
                        positive. Amy Tigner at the University of Texas Arlington reported the
                        following after her graduate students completed the MoEML module: We have learned so much doing this project and
                            the students remain excited and engaged. The collaborative aspect has
                            meant that they have really helped one another, and the overall
                            documents are better. Meg Roland of Marylhurst University, whose
                        undergraduate study abroad students wrote about the London Wall, said that
                        her students had become passionate researchers. Upon starting the
                            MoEML module, Shannon Kelley of Fairfield
                        University, also a contributor to this issue of DHQ, wrote, I am really excited to dig into this project
                            with my new Shakespeare course, and the administrators at my university
                            are thrilled too; after completing the module, she wrote, I have
                            only positive things to say. A happy by-product of the MoEML Partnerships is that we are starting to see
                        interconnections form between the Pedagogical Partners, who cross-review
                        each other’s work and who are developing their own collaborations, including
                        plans to participate on roundtables and panels at future conferences.
                
                
                    Case Studies: Utah Valley University and Washington College
                    McPherson and another early partner, Kathryn Moncrief at Washington College
                        (a small private liberal arts college), have reflected at length on their
                        experiences in public fora, which has helped MoEML identify and implement improvements. Like most new
                        ventures, the Partnership has room to grow beyond its strong start.
                    
                        Utah Valley University
                        McPherson’s experience was key to understanding the strengths and
                            weaknesses of the pilot Partnership. McPherson’s class at UVU was an
                            ideal venue for testing the hypothesis that a partnership between a
                            major DH project and a non-R1 institution could create a research-based
                            learning opportunity. UVU is a large (30K student), open-enrollment
                            university that doubles as a community college. Its focus on
                                Engaged Learning was recognized in 2008 with
                            the official Carnegie designation of Elective Community
                                Engagement, which recognizes collaboration between
                            institutions of higher education and their larger communities for the
                            mutually beneficial exchange of knowledge and resources in a context of
                            partnership and reciprocity. McPherson teaches in a large English
                            Department with a moderate number of majors (40 faculty and
                            approximately 500 majors, divided between Literary Studies, Creative
                            Writing, Writing Studies, and English Education). The Shakespeare course
                            (ENGL 463R) in which McPherson deployed the MoEML module is required for all Literary Studies and
                            Creative Writing students, recommended for English Education students,
                            and typically taken late in junior or during senior year. Class size
                            varies between 15 and 25 students.
                        Playing to her own research strengths, as RBL requires, McPherson
                            designed the course to interrogate Original
                                Practices. The concept of performing Shakespeare
                            according to original performance practices or under original
                            performance conditions was variously familiar to UVU students due to the
                            Grassroots Shakespeare Center, begun in 2009 by two of McPherson’s
                            former students. The troupe visited McPherson’s class and performed
                            scenes from The Taming of the Shrew near
                            the end of the term. McPherson had students undertake in-class
                            performance exercises using materials prepared by Ralph Cohen and the
                            American Shakespeare Center, and made frequent use of comparison clips
                            of modern films and Shakespeare’s Globe performances. For the Engaged
                            Learning component of the course, McPherson had her students research
                            and write an article about the Curtain Theatre for MoEML. She considered this exercise her first DH project.
                            The module allowed the students to mobilize new findings from the
                            discovery and excavation of the Curtain Theatre site in Shoreditch in
                            summer 2012, which was serendipitous since archeological evidence has
                            been crucial to Original Practices research. Working in groups,
                            McPherson’s students addressed five topics: Early Modern Neighborhood
                            and Site; Theatre Architecture; Playing Companies and People; Repertory
                            and Writers; and Modern Site and Archaeology. The resulting essay is now
                            published on the MoEML site.
                                http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/CURT2.htm
                        McPherson’s MLA and SAA reports about the MoEML Partnership made specific recommendations. Her
                            comments targeted the acquisition of research skills, the transition to
                            collaborative work, and the challenges of writing for a new medium.
                                MoEML’s actions or comments are
                            included parenthetically. 
                        
                            Students at non-elite schools need more support for using
                                databases such as EEBO. (MoEML has since published a series of
                                    How-to guides written by undergraduate
                                students working with Kristen Abbott Bennett at Stonehill College,
                                another non-R1 school grappling with digital research tools.
                                    See How-to Guides here: http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/teaching.htm)
                            Students need more than models provided by their reading for
                                understanding the conventions of scholarly writing. (In response,
                                    MoEML wrote a Writing for
                                    the Web guide.)
                            Students need to be drilled regarding the thorough use of
                                documentation and citation, precisely because the stakes are high in
                                this kind of public scholarship. (MoEML’s citation guide is currently appended to the end of
                                its style guide; the project make its innovative citation practices
                                more visible.) 
                            Precise orientation to citing early modern texts via signature and
                                gathering needs to be stressed. (MoEML
                                can take a leading role here by providing links to videos at the
                                British Library, Folger Shakespeare Library, and elsewhere.)
                            A mid-term draft should be required to ensure
                                that students are not procrastinating. (For Herman, the MoEML team performed a mid-term external
                                review to introduce students to the concept of peer review, although
                                an external review can complicate the internal assessment process.) 
                            Conferences outside of class with each team of students would help
                                to foster collaboration and smooth out any interpersonal issues. (As
                                we learn to work collaboratively in our discipline generally, we can
                                all learn from DH.)
                        
                    
                    
                        Washington College
                        Moncrief became interested in the way the MoEML module fosters metaliteracy. Moncrief’s Renaissance
                            Drama class of twenty junior- and senior-level students worked
                            collaboratively to write an article on the Rose Theatre for MoEML; the class was divided into the same
                            sort of topic groupings as McPherson’s class. Moncrief teamed up with
                            scholar-librarian Michele Santamaria to write an article about the
                            metacognitive effects of the MoEML module.
                            They detailed 
                                how metaliteracy was intrinsic to the
                                    experience of undergraduate Renaissance Drama students embarking
                                    upon collaborative research, nested within various cooperative
                                    ventures
                                
                            . See Moncrief and Santamaria’s useful diagram reflecting
                                the “nested levels of collaboration” between students and their
                                peers and students and the teachers as well as between the two
                                teachers (professor and librarian) and, finally, between these two
                                groups (students and teachers) with an 
                                    international community of humanities
                                        scholars contributing to MoEML
                                    
                                . They viewed the MoEML
                            Partnership as creating an ideal opportunity for
                            the students to improve both digital and social media skills while also
                            allowing them to develop their independence as scholars, a key to
                            enhancing their metaliteracy. While only two of the four research teams
                            appeared to “flourish” in the team setting, the students generally
                            reported a high level of pride in contributing to MoEML and expressed a strong belief in the capacity for
                            undergraduates to engage in meaningful research. Santamaria and Moncrief
                            reported that the students came to see themselves as authors of
                                information, and they concluded that 
                                learners benefit tremendously from
                                    collaborative, research-based learning that depends on them
                                    working across several domains of metaliteracy
                                
                            .
                    
                
                
                    Student feedback
                    We sought student feedback via an end-of-term anonymous assessment, modelled
                        on the UVic Course Experience Survey and an instrument designed by the UVic
                        Learning and Teaching Centre. As we are not psychometricians, we drew
                            on the expertise of our institution’s learning and teaching centre. Our
                            main goal was to capture any information that might help us tweak the
                            model. We used a Likert Scale to invite students to strongly
                        disagree, disagree, remain neutral, agree, or strongly agree with various
                            statements. The current edition of our survey is available online
                            at SurveyMonkey. The survey for instructors is at https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/RXYRYHY and the one for
                            students is at https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/RPYB6WL. The results
                        bear out many of our expectations. Among 51 respondents from four different
                        undergraduate classes comprised primarily of third and fourth-year English
                        majors, students by and large thought that the process made them a better
                            researcher” (4.31/5). Students also deeply believed that all
                            undergraduates should have the opportunity to engage in similar,
                            high-stakes research (4.33/5). They sometimes struggled to choose
                        among and deploy sources, even though a comprehensive research guide for
                        students is provided on the MoEML site.
                        Students reported that using the MoEML Guide for Student Researchers
                            http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/research_guidelines.htm.
                        both challenged them and enriched their experience, rating its helpfulness
                        at 3.65 out of 5.
                    All in all, students reported a high level of pride: 4.63 out of 5 said they
                        were proud to contribute to a widely used online scholarly resource.
                        One student reported that My favorite thing about the MoEML module was how it […] engaged our class
                            in legitimate literary research while making use of cutting edge
                            technology! Old books and new computers: it’s the future. Another
                        said the best part of the module was the satisfaction of accomplishing
                            this daunting project.  I can accomplish much more than I thought I
                            could. They reported that the MoEML
                        module encouraged them to think about proper research terms, primary
                            sources, and research engines,
                        which sources are more valuable,
                        the importance of historicising, and how to bring these important
                            aspects of culture and academia into modern conversation and consumption
                            [via] the internet! They learned to consider the validity of
                            information, how to pare down the abundance of it, and how to cross
                            check sources.
                    When asked in what specific ways did you grow and develop as a
                            researcher? students revealed the following:
                    
                        I learned to be more organized and work with a group of people that
                                have different strengths and weaknesses. I learned how to find
                                information that is useful.;
                        I got into the habit of keeping research notes [which] helped with
                                my thesis work;
                        I learned […] how to do real research [and how to]
                                examin[e] the text in deep, meaningful ways using historical context
                                and intensive reasoning and logic.  These important lessons have
                                carried into aspects of my life I have never considered!
                    
                    When asked to reflect on how the MoEML module
                        might be useful for them when applying for a job or graduate school, one
                        respondent said, I have experience in participating in a
                                Digital Humanities project which was successful
                            and allowed people to work and interact w[ith] one another
                            digitally. Another student who worked as a research assistant with
                            MoEML during the Partnership reported that
                            There is something completely inspiring and motivating in knowing
                            that my work is being accessed, assessed, and cited by students and
                            researchers worldwide.
                
                
                    What the project learned
                    Due to the rapid uptake of the Partnership, MoEML found itself with more contributions in the workflow than
                        the team could process quickly. At the time of writing (January 2016),
                            MoEML has had sixteen Pedagogical Partners
                        from four countries and a variety of institutions. See http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/pedagogical_partnership.htm for a
                            current list. The project has published thirteen articles, with
                        five more in draft at the encoding stage, and a further 28 assigned or in
                        revisions. Research assistants in Victoria invested time checking facts,
                        tagging people, places, dates, and sources, finding images, and sometimes
                        performing further research. As MoEML moves
                        forward with future Partnerships, the project team must use its limited
                        resources wisely. To this end, MoEML has
                        already implemented and continues to work on a series of “fixes.” The new
                        Teaching splash page
                            http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/teaching.htm. on the site
                        provides partners with a clear overview of their role, the module, MoEML’s submission criteria, and the resources
                        available to Guest Editors and students on and off site. MoEML now insists that contributions from
                        Partnerships include project-specific identifiers for people, places, and dates.
                            http://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/prepare_contribution.htm#prepare_contribution_entities.
                        Making such identifications are part of the critical work to be done by the
                        researcher; in many cases, MoEML RAs would have
                        to replicate the research to make the identification. Pedagogical
                        Partnerships have helpfully shown where our contributor guidelines needed
                        expansion and clearer organization; it remains to be seen if students would
                        benefit from customized guidelines pitched at their level. MoEML needs to fine-tune the peer-review process
                        so that the work is spread out across a wider range of reviewers. When its
                        current grant funding comes to an end in April 2016, MoEML will need to assess the viability of the Partnerships.
                        Without funding, the project can still support a few experienced partners.
                        Even with renewed grant funding, MoEML will
                        move to a competitive application model. Word-of-mouth alone has brought
                        more partners than MoEML can accommodate,
                        although advertising via a CFP site and various discipline-specific
                        listservs and websites would be an obvious course of action when the process
                        becomes competitive.
                
                
                    What We All Learned/Ethical Matters
                    Partnerships do not always result in publishable content for the project.
                        Some submissions did not meet the standard for publication, a decision
                        usually taken by the Guest Editor but sometimes deferred to the project
                        team. Not all students want to contribute. Janni Aragon,
                        Director of Technology Integrated Learning at UVic, attended one of MoEML’s workshops and pointed out that students
                        need an out. As teachers, we cannot require students to
                        share their work in public fora. They may have personal or professional
                        reasons for wanting their work in the course to be a terminal exercise seen
                        only by the professor. Partners need be aware of ethical implications and
                        legal regulations at their home institutions. They may need to have students
                        sign waivers. They may need to have alternative assignments ready for
                        students who do not wish to participate. Whether or not the work results in
                        a publishable contribution, the partnership is a pedagogical success because
                        the students have developed highly mobile skills in research, writing, and
                        sometimes encoding.
                    We all became acutely aware of the mismatch between the speedy passage of
                        students through courses and the significantly less speedy pace of scholarly
                        publication. Professors had to remain in contact with students for months
                        after the end of the course; students were understandably impatient with the
                        process or simply not available to participate in post-course revisions.
                        Scholars are used to the longer timelines of published research. For the
                        professors, this work is part of their research and/or teaching portfolios;
                        they are willing to put in time to bring the project to completion. For
                        students who are not going on to graduate studies or becoming academics,
                        there is little incentive to continue working on the MoEML contribution. However, students who stay in the academy
                        or who go on to higher level training see their work for the MoEML partnership as a launchpad to a next-level
                        independent study. 
                    The working conditions of contingent academics affected the partnership. A
                        number of our partners have been limited-term or adjunct instructors (Frost,
                        Bennett). Contingent faculty are often less able to propose DH or RBL
                        courses, may have limited access to institutional resources, and are
                        unlikely to have a lab space or dedicated technical support. Opening up our
                        project to contingent faculty means we open up their opportunities to
                        participate in DH research. Given the challenges they face in career
                        continuity, we can provide a permanent and visible home for their work. Such
                        partners seem to be gaining recognition for their participation in our
                        partnership. Because they are actively on the job market most of the time,
                        it becomes incumbent on us to fast-track the work they and their students
                        do.
                
                
                    Expanding and Extending the Model
                    The model is extensible to various pedagogical settings and other types of
                        assignments. Some partners have had their students collectively write a
                        single article on a place of major significance. Until the playhouses have
                        all been written up, those locations will be popular choices for teachers of
                        Renaissance Drama; Herman chose the Blackfriars, McPherson the Curtain,
                        Moncrief the Rose, Bishop the Theatre, Donna Woodford-Gormley the Globe,
                        Kirilka Stavreva Middle Temple Hall, and so on. Woodford-Gormley and
                        Stavreva spread the work across two classes in subsequent terms, thus making
                        two groups of students de facto collaborators across time and
                        courses. Other partners, especially those with graduate students, have
                        assigned smaller topics to individual students; Briony Frost’s MA students
                        at the University of Exeter each tackled one location along a processional
                        route, and Tigner’s graduate students contributed multiple individual essays
                        on waterside locations for a course on Shakespeare and
                            Early Modern Urban/Rural Nature. Ian MacInnes at Albion College
                        placed two summer research scholarship students with MoEML in Summer 2015; one student, Kate Casebeer, elected to
                        encode her own contribution using the MoEML
                        Praxis guidelines normally used only by our internal team members. Roland at
                        Marylhurst University worked a module on London Wall into a Study Abroad
                        course, where her students traced the route of the Roman-era wall during
                        their trip. See Exploring Londinium at
                            Meg Roland’s blog, A Passionate Geography:
                                Romancing King Arthur’s Roman War. Sept. 3, 2014. http://passionategeography.com/2014/09/03/exploring-londinium/.
                        Encyclopedia articles are not the only types of assignments MoEML can accommodate. One of Tracey Hill’s
                        students at Bath Spa University transcribed a pageant book for the anthology
                        of mayoral shows. For Jennifer Drouin’s graduate-level Digital Humanities
                        course at the University of Alabama, MoEML
                        designed an Encoding Partnership whereby students encoded proclamations for
                        the Library as part of their introduction to the Text Encoding Initiative
                        (TEI). Jenstad is currently experimenting with partnering up two classes in
                        different locations to try double-keying diplomatic transcriptions, in an
                        effort to teach descriptive bibliography, transcription, and encoding via an
                        international partnership. The Pedagogical Partners are Jenstad at
                            UVic and Kristin Abbott Bennett at Stonehill. McLean-Fiander is
                            representing MoEML, since Jenstad cannot
                            partner with her own project.
                        MoEML has a prospective Partnership in 3D
                        modelling for which the project will supply ground surveys and architectural
                        information, and the Pedagogical Partner will teach students to interpret
                        the surveys and use Blender and/or Google Sketch-Up to create models of some
                        buildings in London; MoEML will then embed the
                        models in Encyclopedia pages. John Bonnett at Brock University
                            proposed this partnership. He has long had students work with archival
                            documents to recreate historical buildings in the Niagara
                        region.
                    Participants in our workshops have given valuable feedback wondering aloud or
                        in writing how to implement such a partnership for their own projects, embed
                        such a module in a course, or seek out other projects with whom to partner.
                        We would like to see further expansion of this model not necessarily by
                        growth at MoEML but via uptake by other
                        projects. A key limitation on MoEML’s expansion
                        of the Pedagogical Partnership is the availability of grant-funding, since
                        project team members check, encode, and upload content in-house, essentially
                        functioning as a publisher without the infrastructure of a university press.
                        Other digital projects with different types of content, different content
                        management models, and registration tools (e.g., the capacity to capture
                        data via web interfaces, or to register contributors as Wiki users) may be
                        able to accommodate more contributors. Jenstad tested the extensibility of
                        the Encoding Partnership by having her graduate course on “Textual Studies
                        and Methods of Research” partner with the Database of
                            Victorian Periodical Poetry, run by UVic professor Alison
                            Chapman. See Alison Chapman’s description of the project on the
                            Victorian Poetry Network website at http://web.uvic.ca/~vicpoet/database-of-victorian-periodical-poetry/.
                        Students transcribed poems from digital surrogates, followed the project’s
                        guidelines, and downloaded an encoding package prepared by the project’s
                        programmer. Many projects need help with transcriptions, markup, updating
                        bibliographies, reviewing, collecting and entering data, writing
                        encyclopedia entries, surfacing and describing materials, and creating
                        finding aids. Data created by one project might be available for
                        visualization or analysis by another project or using another tool, with the
                        results potentially augmenting what is already available on the project’s
                        site. Projects in need of such help might consider pedagogical partnerships
                        like ours. 
                    Professors looking for real opportunities for their students might consider
                        asking projects if contributions would be welcome. We suggest that such
                        professors look for projects with a Contribute link
                        and/or Contributor Guidelines, an irregular publication cycle (i.e., one not
                        locked into Issues or Releases), a
                        variety of roles that students can perform, evidence of past student
                        contributions (although this evidence is not essential, since a project may
                        never have thought of mobilizing student scholarship), and, of course, a
                        digital presence. It helps to know a colleague on the project (as Herman
                        knew Jenstad). One possible pitch is to say Would you be willing to
                            consider contributions from students if I were to vet them first?
                        Above all, it is important that the project provide an opportunity for
                        students to exercise skills that they would need to learn in the course
                        anyway. If students need to learn palaeography, then a manuscript
                        transcription project or letters project (such as Early
                            Modern Manuscripts Online or Early Modern
                            Letters Online) could be an appropriate project partner.
                        Inspired by their experience as Partners with MoEML, McPherson and Moncrief have implemented a Pedagogical
                        Partnership in their new edition of Shakespeare’s Life
                            and Times (SLT 2.0) for the
                        Internet Shakespeare Editions–an ideal scenario that has mainly Junior
                        students writing for Freshmen, Sophomores, and Juniors.
                    To make such partnerships work, everyone has to benefit. We suggest that a
                            Project needs the following: 
                    
                        a clearly identified contribution (as opposed to an offer to
                            help);
                        reassurance that the partnership will not result in additional work
                            for the project, or a sense that the project’s investment will pay off
                            in terms of a wider user base, stakeholders who care about its content,
                            and a future highly qualified contributor; and
                        a mechanism for ensuring quality. The last of these is no trifling
                            matter. Ideally, quality control would come in the shape of a digital
                            curator or gatekeeper.
                    
                    Potential Pedagogical Partners (i.e., the professors who
                        function as Guest Editors) need some or all of the following:
                    
                        suggestions for possible contributions that will serve the learning
                            objectives of the course and fill current gaps in the project’s
                            structure;
                        a module with clear boundaries that will fit inside the context of a
                            course structure; 
                        teaching and management tips;
                        guidelines for the students to follow when writing and submitting
                            their contributions;
                        research guidelines;
                        assessment rubrics;
                        full credit for their work on the site;
                        an institutional letter of support; and
                         a reminder to check their university’s regulations about ethics and
                            disclaimers.
                    
                    Students need:
                    
                        credit in the form of their name appearing on the page or linked from
                            it;
                        ample guidance from the professor;
                        the feeling that they are making a valuable contribution; 
                        thorough explanations of how to do new things;
                        opportunities to share their expertise; and
                        an out should they wish not to publish their
                                work. While we are certainly attuned to the need to pay
                                student research assistants a fair wage for their labour, we do not
                                view the MoEML Partnership as unfairly
                                    incorporating student labor into the classroom as Spencer
                                Keralis has recently written about in Milking
                                    the Deficit Internship (2016). This shift, he
                                argues, 
                                    makes student labor invisible to the
                                        institution in terms of counting the costs of digital
                                        projects. But more importantly, this student labor is
                                        largely uncredited and unpaid
                                    
                                . MoEML’s Partnership model
                                insists on crediting each student by name and on acknowledging the
                                considerable work of the Guest Editor. Furthermore, the students get
                                academic credit within their individual courses for the MoEML module work they do. Finally, MoEML does not get free labor because the
                                Partnership demands a significant contribution from the project
                                too.
                    
                    While the MoEML Pedagogical Partnership model
                        has room for improvement, it has been successful thus far because all
                        parties have benefitted from the experience.
                
                
                    Public Humanities
                    MoEML’s Pedagogical Partnership also reaches
                        beyond the classroom and builds an expansive scholarly community created by
                        what Lanclos and White call Resident practices: 
                            Networked practices [...] provide an opportunity for
                                individuals to make their identity broadly visible without the
                                mediation of traditional publishers or their institution. These
                                modes of online engagement have been described as Resident in that
                                they involve the individual being present, or residing, to a certain
                                extent online. This is in contrast to Visitor modes of engagement
                                where the individual leaves no online social trace. These new,
                                Resident, forms of agency and online participation are repositioning
                                institutions within a larger, more open, knowledge production
                                landscape. Individuals are increasingly aware, via the opportunities
                                provided by Resident practices on the web, that they do not have to
                                sacrifice as much personal agency to the institution to gain
                                professional credibility as they might have done in a pre-Web
                                era.
                            
                        
                        MoEML engages in this kind of Resident practice
                        by opening up research communities and allowing students to reside in and
                        contribute to a scholarly, digital space where their research can be and has
                        been accessed by scholars and the interested public alike. Because the
                        Partnership acknowledges the capacity of students, with proper guidance, to
                        perform rigorous and original research, and because it publishes this work
                        on an accessible, public platform, it captures research that might not
                        otherwise see the light of day simply because it was conducted by an
                        undergraduate student.
                    Another pedagogical resource that often remains hidden is the course
                        syllabus. The MoEML teaching resource page
                        shares a number of course syllabi from our Partners so that other
                        instructors might benefit from those who have gone before them. The teaching
                        page includes a series of How-to Guides, including the Student
                            Research Guide,
                        How to Write for the Web, and guides for using various digital
                        resources (the latter writing by Bennett’s students at Stonehill College).
                        Upon learning of the MoEML Pedagogical
                        Partnership, Josh Magsam of The Shakespeare
                            Standard reported:  
                            It’s wonderful to see a strong commitment to
                                sharing teaching resources and partnering with other instructors to
                                enhance awareness of the project. I think joint projects and
                                crowd-sourced projects such as this–hybrid pedagogy, if you
                                will–represent some of the most vital and critical teaching work
                                being done in the field
                            
                        . 
                    MoEML fosters a scholarly community beyond the
                        individual classroom, too. Our Partner, Roland, recently wrote to tell us
                        that she took her students to a seniors’ center (at the Provost’s request)
                        so that they could talk about their work on the MoEML project. One of the senior citizens was a retired Blue
                        Badge Guide from London. She asked to read the class’s article on London
                        Wall and ended up catching a few errors and making a number of helpful
                        suggestions to improve the content. As Roland put it, 
                            what a great surprise that was to have her be an
                                additional reader; [... it] just shows the value of getting this
                                kind of work out into the community
                            
                        .
                
            

                Conclusion
                The editors of this issue of DHQ generously invoked
                    the MoEML Pedagogical Partnership in their call for
                    papers. Having been held up as a model of critical skills development, we would
                    like to conclude by reflecting on the extent to which our Partnerships engage in
                    what DHQ issue editors Murphy and Smith
                    characterized as a multidimensional reimagining of where undergrads sit in
                        the field and how we conceive of their [students’] role in the
                        shifting knowledge economies produced by digital scholarship. In
                    producing digital content, our partnering students develop the usual critical
                    skills of English majors but also begin thinking about other things, such as
                    platforms, infrastructures, and how knowledge is made. The Partnership teaches
                    students to be highly aware users of (i.e., Visitors to) digital resources (both
                    subscription and open-access). At the same time, it lowers the technological
                    barriers that often stand between humanities scholars in general (students and
                    faculty alike) and the digital projects created largely by so-called digital
                    humanists. The Partnership enables students to see themselves as producers of
                    digital resources and to become Residents of the digital terrain.  We
                    democratize DH when we open up this subject position to students. The digital
                    space can welcome student contributors simply because it casts a bigger net
                    around original research; opening up MoEML pages to
                    students does not mean taking away publishing opportunities from others. The
                    biggest impediment to publishing student work is time–time spent on peer review,
                    copyediting, and the additional demands of encoding. The MoEML team and the Guest Editors can invest this time in student
                    learning because the benefits are mutual.
                 The Partnership expands the range of possibilities for doing DH.  We can invite
                    students into a project like MoEML without hiring
                    them as Research Assistants. They do not have to apprentice as RAs, nor do they
                    have to acquire encoding or programming skills. In fact, working digitally does
                    not mean only (or even necessarily) digitizing, encoding, or programming. It
                    includes thinking critically about the impact of medium upon readership, the
                    ways we convey information, the types of sources we use, and how we connect to
                    the larger web of knowledge (by citation and/or links). Putting XML:ids into
                    submissions demands that students think about concepts that have been driven by
                    and are required by new forms of digital scholarship. Quoting a toponym from a
                    source is not enough; students have to think about what that toponym represents
                    and point to a stable, shared reference point. They become implicitly aware of
                    the need for authority names, linked open data, and identifiers (DOIs, XML:ids,
                    and URIs). They start to think about humanities research findings as data and
                    information as a network.  At the same time, the Partnership does not preclude
                    opportunities to acquire skills in digital mapping and text encoding if students
                    wish. Professors and students who are technologically savvy or willing to learn
                    can adjust the module to teach various combinations of DH skills and research
                    skills.
                A lot of what we do in the academy is scaffolded learning that builds towards the
                    masterpiece–the complete work that demands mastery of all the skills required of
                    a particular scholarly output. The capstone project, the MA thesis, and the PhD
                    dissertation are the traditional forms of the masterpiece. Like RBL, MoEML’s Partnership asks the undergraduate to produce
                    a masterpiece earlier in the game. The student works with others to take a
                    research problem to its logical conclusion, which is published in an environment
                    where the answer reaches a readership beyond the instructor in the course. The
                    sheer scope of the user-base of an open-access digital project is highly
                    motivating to the student. The scholarly injunctions become immediate and
                    pressing: to be exhaustive, to acknowledge prior and current voices in the
                    scholarly conversation, to consult all available sources of information, to use
                    many types of sources outside their home libraries and home disciplines, and to
                    master the form and richness required for the venue.
                We began this paper talking about how the MoEML
                    Partnership emerged from a confluence of problems and opportunities.
                    While Pedagogical Partnerships are not, in the long run, an efficient way of
                    generating content for MoEML, the project has
                    benefitted tremendously from the influx of fresh voices, the growing community
                    of students and professors who have a digital Residence in
                        MoEML, the corrections they have made to
                    neighbouring pages, their suggestions for new places, and their feedback on the
                    Contributor Guidelines. The Guest Editors have welcomed the opportunity to
                    embrace a new pedagogy that meets new institutional demands, brings high-profile
                    attention to their institutions, and engages students in scholarly publication.
                    Many of the Partners have been featured in their campus magazines and local
                    media, which has, in turn, been good for the project. The full benefit to the
                    students remains to be seen. It is certain that some of them found the prospect
                    of producing publishable work daunting at the outset, and ultimately not all the
                    articles were publishable (which is a reality of academic life). The model will
                    be truly successful if it becomes a habitual way that students interact with and
                    improve the digital resources we all use in our scholarly lives. We fully expect
                    to see many of them stake a greater claim in the digital sphere in the years
                    ahead.
            
