Title:  Creative Data Literacy: A Constructionist
                    Approach to Teaching Information Visualization 
Volume:  012
Issue:  4
Date:  4 February 2019
Abstract:  
                
                Data visualization has rapidly become a standard approach to interrogating and
                    understanding the world around us in domains that extend beyond the technical
                    and scientific to arts, communications and services. In business settings the
                    Data Scientist has become a recognized and valued role . Journalism has re-oriented itself around
                    data-driven storytelling as a potential saviour for an industry in peril . Governments are moving to more data-driven decision
                    making, publishing open data portals and pondering visualization as an
                    opportunity for citizen participation . This
                    journal itself has numerous examples that use visualization tools and techniques
                    within the digital humanities as a tool for exploration 
                    
                    .
                This boom in attention has led large new populations of learners into the field.
                    Formal educational settings have rushed to create new approaches and
                    introductions to this content, but often they fall back on traditional
                    approaches to things such as scientific charting and graphing 
                    . Many view data visualization as a new technology,
                    which runs the risks of replicating old approaches without acknowledging the
                    unique affordances and domains that data visualization relies upon. Data
                    visualization is not simply another technology to integrate into education. It
                    is visual argument and persuasion, far more closely associated with rhetoric and
                    writing than spreadsheets .
                In this paper we present novel approaches to learning technologies and
                    activities, focused on novice learners entering the field of data driven
                    storytelling. We begin with a deeper dive into the problems we see with
                    introducing new learners into a field characterized by inequality, continue with
                    a discussion of approaches for introducing technologies to education, and
                    summarize the inspirational pedagogies we build on. We then offer some design
                    principles and three activities as examples of the concept of creative data
                    literacy. We assert that creative approaches grounded in constructionist
                    educational theories are necessary to empower non-technical learners to be able
                    to tell stories and argue for change with data.
            
Full Body Text: 


                Introduction
                Data visualization has rapidly become a standard approach to interrogating and
                    understanding the world around us in domains that extend beyond the technical
                    and scientific to arts, communications and services.  In business settings, the
                    Data Scientist has become a recognized and valued role .  Journalism has re-oriented itself around
                    data-driven storytelling as a potential savior for an industry in peril . Governments are moving to data-driven decision
                    making, publishing open data portals and pondering visualization as an
                    opportunity for citizen participation . This
                    journal itself has numerous examples that use visualization tools and techniques
                    within the digital humanities as a tool for exploration 
                    
                    .
                This boom in attention has led new populations of learners into the field. Formal
                    educational settings have rushed to create new approaches and introductions to
                    this content, but often they fall back on traditional approaches to things such
                    as scientific charting and graphing 
                    . Many view data visualization as a new technology,
                    which runs the risks of replicating old approaches without acknowledging the
                    unique affordances and domains that data visualization relies upon. Data
                    visualization is not simply another technology to integrate into education. It
                    is visual argument and persuasion, more closely associated with rhetoric and
                    writing than software code .
                In this paper we present novel approaches to learning technologies and
                    activities, focused on novice learners entering the field of data driven
                    storytelling. We begin with a deeper dive into the problems we see with
                    introducing new learners into a field characterized by inequality, continue with
                    a discussion of approaches for introducing technologies to education, and
                    summarize the inspirational pedagogies we build on. We then offer some design
                    principles and three activities as examples of the concept of creative
                        data literacy. We assert that creative approaches grounded in
                    constructionist educational theories are necessary to empower non-technical
                    learners to be able to tell stories and argue for change with data.
            

                Motivations
                A key challenge within the rise of data has been the unequal distribution of data
                    literacy.  When those in positions of power use a new discourse (i.e. data) to
                    engage in their cultural practices, those that are influenced and don't speak
                    this discourse are actively excluded from collaborative construction. This
                    creates data inequality, between those that speak data and
                    those that do not , which we outline in more detail
                    in this section.
                Research by communications scholars and social scientists supports the idea that
                    despite the grand hype around Big Data and the knowledge
                    revolution it will create , there is
                    profound inequality in who is benefitting from the storage, collection and
                    analysis of data and who is not  
                    
                    . Collectively, these authors argue that data has
                    become a currency of power. Decisions of public import, ranging from which
                    products to market, to which prisoners to parole, to which city buildings to
                    inspect, are increasingly being made by automated systems sifting through large
                    amounts of data . As a result, knowing how to
                    collect, find, analyze, and communicate with data is of increasing importance in
                    society. And yet ownership of data is largely centralized, mostly collected and
                    stored by corporations and governments . Critically,
                    the technical knowledge of how to work effectively with data is in the hands of
                    a small class of specialists. People are far more likely to be discriminated
                    against with data or surveilled with data than they are to use data for their
                    own civic ends . This has implications on how people
                    do social science 
                    
                    , practice law , produce
                    policy , govern the city  and create the news 
                    , to cite just some of the proliferating work in
                    this space. 
                While the scholarship of Critical Data Studies  has
                    focused on algorithmic transparency, data discrimination and privacy concerns,
                    there has been comparatively less effort on issues of equity in terms of who has
                    access to the computing power and know-how to be able to make sense of data and
                    how they come to acquire and deploy that knowledge. Mark Andrejevic has termed
                    this the 
                        Big Data Divide
                        
                     and boyd and Crawford have referred to data-haves and have-nots . Crawford has written eloquently on 
                        Artificial Intelligence's White
                            Guy Problem
                        
                    . Certainly, the fact that there are equity and inclusion issues in data
                    science is not surprising given the persistence of digital inequality  and the lack of women and minorities in STEM fields
                        . Cultivating data literacy in a more diverse
                    population is therefore clearly part of any solution or mitigating strategy for
                    data inequality.
                However, teaching data literacy to computer scientists and statisticians is a
                    different proposition than teaching data literacy to non-technical, adult
                    newcomers such as humanities scholars, journalists, educators, artists and
                    non-profit staff. Both authors are educators that introduce data visualization
                    and storytelling to people that desire to learn new skills but do not come from
                    technical backgrounds. These include students in the humanities in graduate and
                    undergraduate settings, non-profit staff trying to become more data-centric in
                    their work, government officials striving to make data-driven decisions, and
                    communicators such as journalists, artists and educators. What makes these
                    audiences similar is that they self-identify more with words than with numbers,
                    they are often wary of technologies, and feel a lack of confidence when working
                    with data and looking at visualizations . For these
                    reasons, we assert that teaching information analysis and design to learners
                    without technical backgrounds requires a set of alternate approaches. 
            

                Creative Data Literacy
                In prior work, we drew from prior work in numeracy, statistical literacy and
                    information literacy to define data literacy as 
                        the ability to read,
                            work with, analyze and argue with data as part of a broader process of
                            inquiry into the world
                        
                    . Popular press has argued for broad data literacy education 
                    . Workshops for nonprofits and activists throughout
                    the world are introducing tools and practices that can help learners use data to
                    advocate for social change 
                    . However, there is a lack of consistent and
                    appropriate approaches for helping novices learn to 
                        speak data
                        
                    .  Some approach the topic from a math- and statistics-centric point of
                    view . Some build custom tools to support
                    intentionally designed activities based on strong pedagogical imperatives . Still others have brought together diverse
                    communities of interested parties to build documentation, trainings, and other
                    shared resources in an effort to grow the 
                        open data movement
                        
                    . Where many of these efforts fall short is on the relegation of data
                    literacy to a set of technical skills such as reading charts and making graphs
                    rather than connecting those skills to broader concepts of critical engagement,
                    social transformation and empowerment.
                Reflecting on the background, contexts, and settings of the learners that we work
                    with drives us to offer more creative and engaging introductions related to data
                    storytelling and data visualization. This work can draw from long histories of
                    more creative and empowering approaches to learning. Here we trace a short
                    lineage of the constructionist approach to education pioneered by Seymour
                    Papert, inflected by the popular education of Paulo Freire. A constructionist
                    approach helps ground the introduction of new technologies and concepts into
                    learning settings without displacing all of the focus onto the technology
                    itself.
            

                Pedagogical Underpinnings
                There are a number of concrete pedagogical theories that educators interested in
                    creative data literacy can draw from for inspiration. Each suggests a set of
                    principles to follow, based on an epistemological theory. What follows is a very
                    short introduction to the key elements we draw from a variety of now-classic
                    approaches to learning.
                The Progressivist approach offers education as a pathway for individuals to
                    become engaged in the social construction of a society. In the U.S., John Dewey
                    was a lead figure in the establishment of this approach to education. Their goal
                    was to give a learner 
                        command of himself
                        
                    . Dewey argues against the learner as an empty vessel; focusing on the
                    child as an active participant in their educational process. He viewed school as
                    the primary mechanism for social progress - 
                        the only sure method of social
                            reconstruction
                        
                    . 
                Jean Piaget fleshes out the process by which this type of learning occurs, via
                    his concepts of assimilation
                    and 
                        accommodation
                        
                    . This work describes how new information and experiences are either
                    assimilated into a learner’s existing theories, or how the new information
                    causes the learner to change her theories to accommodate the new information.
                    This approach values the student as a collaborative learner in educational
                    settings, helping respect their individual experiences and context.
                Lev Vygotsky, coming from the field of psychology, put this type of learning
                    within a larger context with his discussion of the social construction of
                    knowledge. He argues that speech is intricately tied to learning through the
                    development of awareness. This thinking out loud is in fact
                    how we learn; and requires a social context to occur. His Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD) is his
                    suggestion for the optimal context within which such speech and cognitive
                    development occurs . One creates the ZPD by
                    connecting a learner with a well-informed expert to closely work together;
                    thereby allowing a learner that is about to master a concept to move beyond
                    their level of development. The emphasis on interaction in the learning setting
                    and learning as a social process is a key contribution of Vygotsky's work for
                    us. This emphasis on social practices for learning is also a central component
                    to new literacy studies , increasingly used as
                    multimodal model for literacy in the digital humanities.
                Paulo Freire's approach to popular
                        education rethinks these approaches from a frame of learning as
                    liberation . He argues that education has
                    historically been used as a tool of oppression, and we need to change it into a
                    tool of re-humanization. In parallel, for the educator he offers a path of
                    re-examination and self-questioning. Freire builds on Dewey's criticism of the
                    idea of learners as empty vessels, leading to a concept of critical pedagogy.
                    This frames learners as active agents in their learning contexts, empowering
                    them to rebuild themselves through education. For Freire, a primary path to
                    social change is the building up of critical strategies.
                bell hooks builds on Freire's critical pedagogy and draws from feminist theory to
                    articulate an approach to teaching that actively fosters learners' ability to
                    challenge an unjust status quo. For hooks as well as Freire, education may
                    either be used to reproduce the current status quo or to empower people to work
                    together for a more equitable, socially just world. hooks advocates that
                    education should be the practice of
                        freedom by which she means the ability to transgress and challenge
                    existing conditions. hooks introduces dimensions of race, gender and class into
                    critical pedagogy and argues that teachers should engender critical awareness
                    and engagement in their students .
                Building on Piaget and Vygotsky's work, Seymour Papert's concept of constructionism offered that
                    constructing out loud with
                    objects or ideas lets us think about the active embodiments of our learning . His approach revolves around the idea that optimal
                    learning occurs when people are designing and making theories and objects that
                    are meaningful to them or their peers — you learn by doing the task with your
                    peers. This creates opportunities to build knowledge out loud. Like others, this
                    pedagogy values the learner as a rich individual full of experiences, knowledge,
                    and ideas that can be engaged to introduce them to new material. Papert’s
                    intellectual descendants have created a variety of approaches to draw from,
                    including design principles for building software for learners 
                     and guidelines for creating activities to introduce
                    those tools .
                A constructionist approach offers us support for multiple ways of learning. The
                    constructionist acknowledges that there are many paths for many learners, and
                    supports the learner in their path-finding endeavors. Support is found for this
                    idea by connecting constructionism to feminist theories of knowledge, arguing
                    against things like the superiority of scientific abstract thought http://web.media.mit.edu/~ascii/papers/turkle_papert_1990.pdf.
            

                Deploying Technologies for Learning
                How are new technologies, methods and tools adapted into existing learning
                    situations? It is worth reflecting on questions of adoption - how new
                    technologies either design for a current learning paradigm or seek to circumvent
                    or disrupt it. Technologies reflect the social and cultural context of their
                    creation. When a technology enters an educational situation, such as a school,
                    it is reshaped and reformed in the image of that setting. This can lead to modes
                    of use that the creators of that technology never intended, and perhaps even in
                    opposition to the modes of use they did intend. Technology developers can
                    respond to this schooling of technology in a variety of
                    ways. Three approaches that merit more discussion include: 
                        Conformity: designing for the dominant paradigm 
                        Institutionalism: embedding pedagogy into the technology 
                        Insurrectionism: attempting to disrupt the dominant paradigm 
                    
                The easiest approach is conformity; namely designing for the dominant paradigm.
                     This approach acknowledges and respects the power of educators and
                    administrators in deciding what role technology should be allowed to play in
                    their school setting.  It pushes the role of the technology developer to the
                    side, suggesting that their interests and motivations are secondary to that of
                    the educational institution.  This acquiescence also lends itself to the school
                    recreating existing power structures and pedagogical paradigms within the
                    technology, as it seeks to perpetuate itself and its systems (as any existing
                    organization does).  In software, this is known as Conway's law; the idea
                    that 
                        organizations which design
                            systems... are constrained to produce designs which are copies of the
                            communication structures of these organizations
                        
                    .  For example: If the school uses worksheets to document infractions, the
                    educational tool ends up using worksheets to introduce students to its features.
                    We offer Hour of Code as an illustrative current example.  This movement,
                    and the code.org website that supports it, uses traditional models of education
                    in an effort to introduce millions of children across America to software
                    coding.  Students are brought in groups to computer labs and libraries,
                    introduced to the code.org website, and offered an hour to go through activities
                    on the computer step by step, introducing them to the basics of coding . This introduces new concepts within the mechanisms
                    and norms of the existing school settings.
                The insurrectionist approach is more radical; using educational technology to
                        disrupt the existing paradigms of the intended
                    destination.  This can create an adversarial nature between the developers of
                    said technology and those in control of the education setting where they intend
                    their tools to be used. This can be described as a question of working within
                    the system versus working around the system.  An illustrative example here is
                    the One Laptop Per Child project (OLPC).  They attempted to engineer around the
                        schooling of an educational technology by deploying it
                    without a standard roll-out, based on iterative early design to gauge student
                    engagement . Ultimately this approach was written
                    off by most as a failure, based on metrics of logistical success 
                        http://www.bu.edu/writingprogram/journal/past-issues/issue-3/shah/
                    or standardized testing outcomes 
                        http://foreignpolicy.com/2009/09/09/why-did-one-laptop-per-child-fail/.
                    That debate on the merit of those metrics continues in both academic and
                    development circles, because the program leaders argue that the pedagogical
                    impacts of the project have been profoundly felt and impact educational
                    technologies and technologists to this day.
                Conformity, institutionalism, insurrectionism can all serve as models for any
                    educator looking to innovate on pedagogy for the technology-driven topic of data
                    visualization. One must pick a path, eyes open to the challenges and
                    opportunities of each. 
            

                Principles for a Constructionist Approach to Data Visualization
                Melding these pedagogies, and deciding on an approach to introducing technologies
                    to support learning data visualization, leads to foundational approaches we
                    take. In general, we take an institutionalist approach to operationalizing
                    constructionist theory for the purposes of teaching data visualization.  We take
                    this approach based on our current roles within the world of higher education,
                    our belief in the power of individual teachers to transform institutional
                    learning environments, and the opportunity provided by existing educational
                    structures to get in front of large numbers of learners. The three principles we
                    draw from the constructionist education are Project-based learning, Hands-on
                    learning and Peer learning. In this section, we define, explain and give
                    examples of each principle in turn as well as relate the principle more
                    specifically to the domain of data literacy and visualization.
                
                    Project-based learning (tied to the learner interests)
                    Project-based learning is a model that organizes learning around projects,
                        which can be defined as 
                            complex tasks, based on
                                challenging questions or problems, that involve students in design,
                                problem-solving, decision making, or investigative activities; give
                                students the opportunity to work relatively autonomously over
                                extended periods of time; and culminate in realistic products or
                                presentations
                            
                        . Project-based learning builds on the constructivist and
                        constructionist ideas that learning is something that is actively built by
                        learners rather than transmitted linearly from teacher to student - what
                             called the banking model of education. In
                        project-based learning, projects help students encounter the central
                        problems and questions of a discipline, involve students in a constructive
                        investigation, and are student-driven and realistic . 
                    What does a project-based learning approach look like for data analysis and
                        information visualization? First, project-based learning is inquiry driven
                        so the first step of project-based pedagogy with data is helping students to
                        understand what kinds of questions can be answered (or at least partially
                        answered) with data and whether the data one needs has been collected in the
                        first place. Determining which institutions may have collected such data
                        (and why) involves creative political thinking as well as savvy information
                        retrieval skills. Once learners understand what kinds of questions may be
                        answered with data, a project-based learning approach grounded in Freire's
                        model of popular education guides them to ask questions that have meaning
                        for themselves and their communities. While many tutorials teach with
                        datasets such as car performance metrics or server logs, these are data for
                        which most new learners do not have a rich context of lived experience. If
                        learners can bring their own context and lived experience to the table, this
                        will enable them to ask better questions, draw a richer picture of the
                        data's limitations and perhaps even challenge the data collection practices.
                        Rather than focusing the majority of attention on the
                            right and wrong visual tactics
                        to create polished data visualizations, taking a project-based learning
                        approach focuses more attention on the exploring and analysis stages of the
                        process. This involves helping learners ask better questions about the data,
                        spot missing or bad data, and understand the limitations of what they may
                        and may not be able to conclude from any given data set. Finally, a
                        project-based learning approach to information visualization scaffolds
                        learners through the whole data analysis and visualization pipeline rather
                        than using different datasets and subjects at each stage. In this way, the
                        process becomes iterative, rather than idealized and procedural, and the
                        learners may return to prior stages as they encounter hurdles or identify
                        better questions to ask.
                
                
                    Hands-on learning (embodied)
                    Hands-on learning emphasizes the experiential nature of learning over the
                        transmission (or banking) model of education where an
                        instructor talks to a room of students who sit quietly and listen. Doing and
                        making with the active participation of one's hands and body is central to
                        this approach, articulated well by Progressive Era educators 
                        . For Dewey, learning was not about the
                        passive reception of knowledge which exists a priori out in the world but
                        about active learning that engages the learner's hands
                        and five senses in the construction of knowledge. Building off of Vygotsky's
                            thinking out loud approach described above, Papert shifts the
                        focus from verbalizing thoughts to creating 
                            objects to think with
                            
                        . In particular, Papert showed how learning about computational
                        thinking - the seemingly abstract digital processes of personal computers
                        and robots - could be grounded in making concrete representations and
                        tangible objects. Externalizing the learning process through embodied
                        creation aids in learners' constructing their own knowledge about the world
                            .
                    Creating situations for hands-on learning may seem to be a challenge for
                        information design, whose outputs one most often sees in two dimensions on
                        screens.  Increasingly, however, educators and artists are experimenting
                        with ways to visceralize,
                            physicalize
                        
                        
                        
                        
                         and otherwise make data tangible, embodied and
                        felt. While creative information displays such as these may not be the end
                        goal of a particular pedagogical process, showing these examples can expand
                        learners' thinking about what constitutes information design and what
                        possible outputs of a data analysis process may look like. There are also a
                        number of ways that hands-on learning can be incorporated into the process
                        (rather than the product) of data analysis. Warm-up exercises, introduced at
                        the beginning of the learning process, might include making data sculptures
                        from a simple data set or doing a group critique of a large printed
                        infographic. Hands-on learning at this stage of the process helps to build
                        confidence for non-technical learners and create a low barrier to entry for
                        technical subject matter, essential for later learning . In later parts of the data analysis process,
                        collaborative sketching and low-fidelity paper prototyping can be extremely
                        important methods to focus learners on the story they want to tell with data
                        rather than on the mechanics of operating a particular software program or
                        writing working code . The sculptures, sketches,
                        and paper prototypes constitute objects to think with
                        that help learners simultaneously see and reflect on their data analysis
                        process, as well as test it out with others, in order to take the next
                        step.
                
                
                    Peer learning
                    Constructivist approaches to education believe that learning is grounded in
                        experience  and human experience, according to
                        psychologists such as Vygotsky, is rooted in a social context with sustained
                        relationships. This points towards incorporating peer learning into
                        educational situations so that learners may work together on meaningful
                        problem-solving activities, negotiating their learning through language.
                        Peer learning can be defined as the acquisition of knowledge through active
                        helping and supporting among status equals or matched companions . Because this type of learning requires peers to
                        verbalize concepts, a form of simultaneously teaching oneself and another,
                        this helps embody and crystallize thought into language . Peer learning connects back to both
                        project-based learning and hands-on learning because the basic premise is
                        that people learn better through collaborative, meaningful problem-solving
                        activities than through listening to an expert or working through exercises
                        alone.
                
            

                Our Pedagogy in Practice
                We have put this pedagogy into practice in a number of ways, in a variety of
                    contexts, and with diverse learners.  This section describes three specific
                    activities and discusses how they are motivated by the pedagogy and approach to
                    using technology in educational settings as described above.
                
                    Just-in-Time Experts
                    Working with data involves piecing together a patchwork quilt of tools.  The
                        sheer number of tools to choose from has made it impossible to introduce
                        even the most important of them all to students. The co-authors of this
                        paper have, in separate work, logged more than 500 free or freemium tools
                        designed for non-technical users to collect and analyze data or create data
                        visualizations. More critically, there isn't well-established criteria for
                        helping students understand how and when to piece together this quilt.  To
                        address this challenge we look to peer learning approaches.
                    In our undergraduate and graduate courses at MIT and Emerson College,
                        respectively, we have students write reviews of tools for each other as a
                        way to distribute expertise in the classroom.  We created a website called NetStories
                            www.netstories.org/tools with reviews of online tools for
                        working with data, where the reviews are crowdsourced as assignments to the
                        participants in our classes.  In parallel, we maintain an informal list of
                        any tool for working with data that may or may not have yet been reviewed.
                        In class, we have learners pick the top 3 tools they are interested to
                        learn, and then assign each person one tool to learn and write a review
                        about. Often these are tools that we, as the instructors, have never used.
                        The audience for each review is other learners, including other teachers.
                         We have each student present the tool they reviewed for 5 minutes in class,
                        allowing for broader awareness across the class. For the duration of the
                        course, students are then considered the class expert
                        in that tool and the instructor refers other students to them if they need
                        to use it in their final projects. 
                    Another example involves having students teach tools to each other to
                        establish criteria for assessing when and how to use them in appropriate
                        ways.  As an example, Bhargava uses this technique to introduce his
                        undergraduate and graduate students to useful tools for mapping.  He
                        assigned half the class a tutorial that introduced them to CARTO, and
                        assigned the other half a tutorial for mapping in Tableau Public.
                            https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/comparative-media-studies-writing/cms-631-data-storytelling-studio-climate-change-spring-2017/assignments/
                              Each group was assigned the task of analyzing the same
                        dataset geographically using the tool specified.  In the subsequent class
                        the groups were paired across tools; each pair comprised of one person that
                        learned CARTO and one that learned Tableau.  They were then given 15 minutes
                        each to introduce the other to what they made, how they had done it, and why
                        that tool might be useful.  The activity concluded with reflections about
                        the comparative advantages, affordances, and limitations of each tool.  
                    Whereas the Just-in-Time experts examples, above, were for undergraduate and
                        graduate college students, we typically run the WordCounter Sketch a Story activity
                            https://databasic.io/en/wordcounter/wordcounter-activity-guide.pdf
                        in more ad-hoc, one-time workshops for digital humanists, journalists,
                        nonprofit and government workers. The activity introduces learners to basic
                        concepts of quantitative text analysis. Learners often approach text as
                        qualitative data, unaware of the potential for quantitative analysis of text
                        that computational approaches provide. Counting words is a fundamental
                        strategy of most computational text processing, including more complex
                        techniques such as machine learning and topic modeling.
                    To introduce the tool and the activity we discuss motivations for
                        quantitative text analysis and try to give domain-specific examples. In the
                        humanities, for example, scholars are looking to computational methods for
                        alternate kinds of insights into large bodies of text, which is often
                        referred to as 
                            distant reading
                            
                        . In journalism, news organizations are increasingly under pressure to
                        make sense of large document dumps like the Panama Papers or the WikiLeaks
                        diplomatic cables. This is text at a scale which would be impossible for a
                        single person to read and must be treated quantitatively for the sheer
                        reason of scale. And in government, cities are increasingly gathering
                        citizen ideas and comments in qualitative form and need a way to start to
                        draw out patterns. For the WordCounter activity, we introduce the idea of
                        analyzing music lyrics quantitatively and show several inspirational
                        examples of prior work that analyzes music lyrics, including the Rap
                        Research Lab and Spotimap.
                    
                        The WordCounter results page, showing an analysis of Beyonce's
                            lyrics
                        
                    
                    Once we have explained the motivations, we demo the tool for just five
                        minutes. WordCounter is a simple web application in which users can paste a
                        block of text or upload a plain text file. The back-end server uses open
                        source libraries to count the words, bigrams (two-word phrases) and trigrams
                        (three-word phrases) in the uploaded text. After submitting their corpus,
                        the user sees tables listing the most frequently used words, bigrams, and
                        trigrams along with an option to download a CSV file (Figure 1). WordCounter can operate on sample
                        data we have included, text the learner pastes in, a file the learner
                        uploads, or text from a website URL the learner pastes in.  It includes two
                        advanced options - toggles for case sensitivity and the removal of common
                        words (stopwords).
                    Working in groups of three, learners have fifteen minutes to decide which
                        lyrics to run through WordCounter in order to find a
                            story to tell with the results. The sample data for
                        the tool includes lyrical corpora for a variety of popular musical artists
                        in English, Spanish and Portuguese (including Beyoncé, Elvis Presley, Maná,
                        Legião Urbana, etc.). Each team uses crayons and large pads of paper to
                        create a sketch of a visual presentation of their story to share with peers
                        for feedback. The visual outputs resemble those seen in . In our courses, the class then spends 10-15
                        minutes discussing the stories and using them as a jumping off point for
                        further discussion of text mining and text analysis concepts.
                    
                        A sketch created by students comparing how narcissistic 3 artists
                            are
                        
                    
                    While the activity is short, the focus on finding a
                            story is a prompt for learners to use the tool,
                        interpret and filter the results using prior knowledge of musical artists,
                        and translate their organizing concept into visual language. The activity
                        constitutes a simple model for a project-based learning approach to data
                        visualization in a low-stakes environment with fun subject matter. Peer
                        groups of three learners work together to negotiate each stage of the
                        process, including selecting relevant data, suggesting focus ideas, and
                        developing visual representations with color, hand-drawn icons and pictures.
                        Translating the story into visual language is a key
                        part of the hands-on learning aspect of this activity. Learners often start
                        to make key visual design decisions, such as using color keys to represent
                        data about individual artists, using familiar icons to represent concepts
                        such as love, and using size and shape to denote differential
                        quantities. How novices use visual mappings and narratives in these types of
                        data-driven sketches is an active area of study in the information
                        visualization field . In the post-activity
                        shareback, facilitators work to highlight these emerging design decisions
                        and point out how they lead to more intentional and systematic strategies
                        for visual information design. Simple, short activities can embody all three
                        principles of project-based learning, hands-on learning and peer
                        learning.
                
                
                    Creating a Narrative Storybook
                    Our second example is related to constructing strong narratives in
                        explanatory visualizations.  Our hands-on activity guides students through
                        telling their data-driven story in storybook form, to flesh out the
                        narrative structure and the key plot points.
                            https://datatherapy.org/activities/activity-write-a-data-storybook/
                    While introducing the idea of telling stories with visualizations, educators
                        often break them into two buckets - exploratory or explanatory .  Exploratory visualizations provide some
                        interface, visual or interactive, to manipulate the data being shown.  They
                        allow the user to explore the data and find a story of their own.
                         Explanatory visualizations use data to tell a strong and clear story
                        through the use of visual mapping and graphical symbols. They rely on
                        narrative structure to convey the story of the data to the reader; built
                        through time, physical space, or both.
                    Explanatory visualizations that strive to tell a story need strong narrative
                        structure.  We find students often critique this aspect of examples we
                        discuss.  These critiques open lively discussions, but don't provide a space
                        for students to practice the art of stitching together a narrative.  To
                        allow this, we offer the storybook activity as a playground where students
                        can explore their story's narrative, without worry about the details of the
                        visual mappings or symbolical glossary they will build on.
                    The activity works best once a group of learners has started to narrow in on
                        the main story they hope to tell. We often use this in classroom settings
                        after a group of students has picked a dataset they will be working with and
                        analyzed it to find a particular narrative that they find engaging. Learners
                        are asked to bring their current story in the form of a template that says
                            the data say _______, we want to tell that story because _______.
                         We then give each group a large piece of paper and a pair of scissors.  We
                        then lead them through a classic technique of folding that paper, with one
                        small cut, into a small book with 3 two-page spreads, a front cover, and a
                        back cover. Once the paper is in book form, each group is instructed to
                        write once upon a time… on the cover and the end on the back.
                         The rest of the pages are available for them to sketch out their story in a
                        form similar to a children's storybook, using large graphics and story text.
                         We offer crayons or thick markers as the implements to write with, to both
                        suggest the playful approach and keep the visuals they choose to include at
                        low fidelity.
                    
                        Participants at a workshop sketching their storybook
                        
                    
                    This activity lets participants focus in on the backbone of their story to
                        make sure it is strong and clear.  It doesn't argue against nuance and
                        detailed story-telling, but rather provides the skeleton from which to hang
                        the details from.  If their story can't be reduced to this simple form, then
                        their narrative needs further iteration.  As with the WordCounter sketching
                        exercise, this activity gets learners off the screen and back into a space
                        they might be more familiar with - namely crayons and paper. The
                            story-time we host at the end, where each group
                        reads their story to the rest of the class, offers a context for the kind of
                        social construction of knowledge that Vygotsky discusses.  The storybook
                        artifact itself is a classic thing to think with from a
                        Constructionist point of view; an embodiment of the learning process that
                        can be passed around, discussed, and iterated upon until a final polished
                        data visualization is created.  In addition, it brings a simple element of
                        fun into learning settings in a way that makes sense.  This isn't fun for
                        fun's sake, but rather fun that is had while doing the precise activity that
                        is being learned.
                
                
                    Other Creative Processes and Outputs
                    To truly rethink approaches to teaching data visualization, one must take a
                        step back and reconsider what visualization implies, who it includes,
                        and who it excludes.  The term itself has become loaded - evoking mental
                        pictures of strong, well designed graphics that depict some data-driven
                        image of truth. This mythology of the all-knowing data visualization,
                        occasionally propagated by designers themselves , can be broken down by renaming it as an
                        information presentation.  This recasting is both non-intimidating and
                        welcoming.  Most of our audiences are intimidated by data, but feel
                        comfortable with information.  Few work on visualization, but most give
                        presentations.  We choose our words carefully in workshop and classroom
                        settings to be more inclusive.
                    Similarly, the materiality and media used to create data visualizations can
                        be questioned to move beyond technological fetishism.  Technological
                        expertise need not be a barrier to creating data visualizations, if one
                        calls them simple visual presentations of information.  This opens a door to
                        using paper printouts of data tables and pie charts with a community group
                        to collaboratively design a mural, for example. Working together with
                        community groups, Bhargava has painted 10 such murals around the world .  Similarly, one can look to classic low-tech
                        media from novel sources such as kindergarten to offer a data
                            sculpture activity that allows learners to sketch
                        their data-driven stories with pipe-cleaners, googly eyes, and other such
                        craft materials.  These types of creative invitations align more closely
                        with the pedagogy we described earlier. They specifically follow a
                        constructionist approach to building out loud, and borrow Freire's
                        approach to starting with materials that are familiar to and owned by the
                        learner. While data literacy does not end with pompons and googly eyes,
                        these can function as a productive starting point to get more people in the
                        door (and to make the door a little larger).
                
            

                Conclusion
                In this paper we have outlined creative approaches to teaching data analysis and
                    visualization to adult learners from non-technical backgrounds, including
                    digital humanists, journalists, government officials, non-profit staff, and
                    artists. Data is a currency of power but the technical know-how to make meaning
                    with data is distributed unequally in contemporary Western society. Our
                    pedagogical strategies are grounded in learning theories out of the tradition of
                    constructivist education, which view the learner as an active participant in
                    constructing new knowledge and applying it in productive ways to transform their
                    social reality. We assert that data literacy for these audiences should be
                    taught with creative, social strategies over solo exercises and rote learning.
                    Appraches that emerge from the constructivist perspective include project-based
                    learning, hands-on learning and peer learning. We describe examples of how these
                    may be productively applied to learning about data analysis and visualization.
                    These are just a few examples of what we hope is an expanding repertoire of
                    constructionist approaches to building data literacy at scale.
                That said, we consider this work preliminary. Much work remains to be done in
                    clarifying and standardizing the definition of data literacy, especially in
                    relation to a shifting field of technological developments and visual
                    communication practices. What should data literacy look like for non-technical
                    learners, who will not go on to be data scientists, but who will need to
                    communicate with data in their professional lives? Finally, there is room for
                    inquiry into how to best measure and evaluate the learning that is taking place
                    for non-technical adult learners. That said, this paper argues that the best way
                    forward is through engaging learners where they are with hands-on creative
                    activities that build their capacity. Without such invitations any efforts to
                    work with novices will fall into a techno-centric focus on software skills
                    acquisition, which has little chance of connecting learners to the opportunity
                    of data to help them achieve their goals. This is a critical research agenda for
                    those in the digital humanities space, who have a history and practice of
                    working on precisely this concern.
            
