Title:  Introduction to Special Issue: Project
                    Resiliency in the Digital Humanities
Volume:  017
Issue:  1
Date:  26 May 2023
Abstract:  
                This introduction to the Project Resiliency issue argues that we have work to do
                    in getting projects to the point of being done and archivable. The Endings
                    Project, a collaboration between three developers, three humanities scholars,
                    and three librarians, arose from the maintenance burden accrued by the
                    Humanities Computing and Media Centre at the University of Victoria and our
                    desire to design projects that, from their inception, are ready for long-term
                    archiving. After describing the events leading up to the Endings Symposium and
                    briefly summarizing the articles in this issue, we discuss the necessity of a
                    culture of constraint if we wish to preserve digital humanities projects in the
                    same way that libraries preserve books.
            
Full Body Text: 
Introduction to Special Issue: Project Resiliency in the Digital Humanities

                
                    
                         What we call the beginning is often the end And to
                            make an end is to make a beginning.  The end is where we start
                            from.  – T. S. Eliot, Little Gidding
                    
                

                
                    The end is where we start from
                

                Over the past decade, digital humanists have come a long way in recognizing when
                    a project is done
                    . But DH still has a problem when it comes to
                    project resiliency. As Constance Crompton points out in her contribution to this
                    issue, DH grant funding is disproportionately awarded to new and shiny digital
                    technologies and tools rather than to disciplinary scholarship implemented and
                    published with standard digital tools. Almost no funding is available for
                    maintenance, remediation, upgrading, and remaking, even though technological
                    frameworks will have changed considerably in a five-year funding cycle. The
                    result is a huge maintenance burden for project leads and developers (Holmes
                    & Takeda in this issue) and/or a hosting and storage problem for
                    institutions (Cummings in this issue).
            

                What we call a beginning: Project Endings
                Most of the papers in this DHQ special issue are the
                    product of a virtual symposium held in April 2021 by The Endings Project at the University
                    of Victoria. The Endings Project, a five-year collaboration funded by the Social
                    Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC), is creating tools,
                    principles, policies, code, and recommendations to help digital scholarship
                    practitioners create accessible, stable, long-lasting resources in the
                    humanities. Unusually for DH, the Endings Project was initiated by developers
                    (see Holmes and Takeda in this issue). It brings together digital humanists and
                    librarians because, as Matthew Kirschenbaum has argued, Digital humanists need the long-term perspective on data
                            that archivists have
                        . The
                    Endings team’s developers (all of them humanists by their first training) are
                    the bridge between Humanities researchers and Librarians/archivists. The Endings
                    Project facilitates a long-term conversation between the three constituencies
                    responsible for the intellectual generation, building, and long-term
                    preservation of digital research products.

                The impetus for The Endings Project was the substantial maintenance burden
                    accrued by UVic’s Humanities Computing and Media Centre (HCMC), which has been involved in over
                    200 digital humanities projects since the 1990s. Its history, as described in
                    Holmes & Takeda, clearly shows the problems inherent in current approaches
                    to digital edition projects, particularly projects with short-term or sporadic
                    grant funding. The growing maintenance burden facing the HCMC was ultimately
                    unsustainable. Project Endings was conceived and convened to address this
                    problem.

                The mission of The Endings Project was: 
                        to discover what human and institutional factors prevent completion of
                            projects;
                        to learn how to make web-based digital editions that will last
                            indefinitely without maintenance; and
                        to learn how to archive finished projects without placing undue
                            burdens on the repository.
                     Ultimately, we wanted to know how projects end, why and when they fail
                    to achieve their final milestone, what constitutes a good ending, and where best
                    to store the finished product so that its research outputs continue to be
                    available long-term.


            

                To evaporate one’s thoughts in a sonnet: Cultures
                    of constraint

                The Earl of Essex was said to have put his arguments to Queen Elizabeth in the
                    highly constrained form of the sonnet .
                    While sonnets did not save the earl’s neck, we do believe that the answer to the
                    question of how to create long-term, accessible resources is found in
                    cultivating cultures of constraint. We have phrases like scope creep and feature creep to
                    describe the near-irresistible temptations to act on every good idea a project
                    member may have. We introduce the term platform
                        creep to describe easy-to-deploy platforms that facilitate rapid
                    deployment of a new project, but incur technical debt leading to inevitable
                    obsolescence. At the end of these types of projects, project leads are often
                    surprised when their institutional library or archive is unable to preserve the
                    bespoke software stack they’ve cobbled together. Instead of trying to preserve
                    what we accidentally made, we should be trying to make what can be
                    preserved.

                The fewer flourishes in software, the longer the project seems to last. The
                    recent work of the HCMC has been to be innovative within a limited set of
                    technologies, in order to minimize the maintenance burden of over 200 projects,
                    so that developer time can be invested in newer projects coming in. We learned
                    quickly that a simple security update could render sites unreadable, thus
                    necessitating constant tending and time. The need for action within very strict
                    constraints (time and funding) forced us to be creative to serve our users.

                There are unspoken constraints in the library, as well. Space and human resources
                    force librarians and archivists to make hard decisions about what stays and what
                    goes – weeding the stacks of unused material to make room for new books is one
                    of the less understood aspects of librarians’ jobs. Recently, a member of the
                    Humanist Discussion List asked why librarians can’t preserve digital projects as
                    they do books. It seems like a reasonable request at first glance, but the vast
                    number of bespoke DH projects that would require continual software updates and
                    rewrites in order to keep running quickly would quickly made library
                    preservation an unmanageable task — even with strong documentation created by
                    the projects (and good documentation also tends to be something we run out of
                    time to do). Although libraries and archives can’t fire up hundreds or thousands
                    of Wordpress and Drupal sites, they certainly can run a server on which flat
                    sites can be stored, accessed, and preserved. Asking for such a server is a
                    reasonable request. In this way, limitations need to be the drivers of
                    innovation and the DH community should see constraint as an admirable
                    feature of a project since it will give the project the best chance of survival.
                    As a community, we need to adopt constraint as an aesthetic, and make it a part
                    of the stories we tell, a phrase Claire Battershill
                    explores in this issue, about our work.

            

                The Symposium

                The work of Endings began with a day seminar in which the UVic Endings
                    researchers, developers, and librariansThe Endings Team originally
                        consisted of researchers Claire Carlin, Ewa Czaykowska-Higgins, Elizabeth
                        Grove-White, and Janelle Jenstad; developers Stewart Arneil, Martin Holmes,
                        and Greg Newton; and librarians Corey Davis, John Durno, and Lisa Goddard.
                        Since 2016, Elizabeth Grove-White has retired, and J. Matthew Huculak has
                        replaced Corey Davis on the team. Research assistants and collaborators have
                        included Emily Comeau, Tye Landels, Daniel Martin, and Joey Takeda.
                    met to describe their work, share their institutional vantage point, and learn
                    from each other. We made many surprising discoveries about each other and
                    deconstructed erroneous assumptions about the roles of our institutional
                    colleagues. For example, the Library’s position on archiving was effectively
                    invisible to researchers and developers; the web subdomain of a project
                    (mapoflondon.uvic.ca, for example) seemed self-evidently crucial to researchers
                    as an extension of the project’s title and brand, while to the Library it
                    seemed obvious that the subdomain didn’t matter at all and that an archived
                    project should be delivered through a library-specific domain.

                This day seminar led to our conducting a survey of DH practitioners, in order to
                    learn about the experiences and realities faced by those working in other
                    contexts and institutions. What we learned from the survey (see ; ) was not
                    surprising: most projects faced exactly the same sorts of problems and
                    limitations, although the scale of technical support and resources provided by
                    host institutions varied widely. From the 125 survey respondents, we identified
                    25 project leads with whom we conducted more in-depth interviews during 2019 and
                    2020.

                These interviews were then transcribed and encoded (see Comeau in this issue for
                    a detailed description of the interview and analysis process) to provide us with
                    a searchable resource from which we could easily draw examples and examine
                    general tendencies and issues across the DH landscape. Papers are forthcoming
                    that describe the results of those interviews. Finally, we invited a selection
                    of our interviewees from a range of different disciplines to continue the
                    co-created conversation by participating in the 2021 symposium that gave rise to
                    this special issue.

            

                The Papers

                We begin with a pair of papers that address two of the key problems in foreseeing
                    an ending to a digital project. In The Stories We
                        Tell, Claire Battershill addresses our very human reluctance to
                    imagine our own projects coming to an end. She proposes that if we think about
                    DH projects in a literary sense, we can analyze and read
                        digital projects as the creative and multifaceted texts that they are and
                        become. We can perhaps approach them with intention and care not only as
                        technical artifacts but also as works that we’ve made, often along with a
                        number of collaborators. Projects begin in promise, potential, and excitement; despite challenges along the
                    way, we keep projects going because the project becomes intrinsic to our purpose
                    and definition, especially for the many digital humanists in precarious
                    employment. Resolving disciplinary and other inequities would go a long way
                    towards helping projects reach their end, she argues, because a team in stable
                    institutional positions may keep collaborating on other projects, large or
                    small. Constance Crompton points out the ways in which funding structures that
                    reward innovation have discouraged sustainable, replicable practices until the
                        recent turn to sustainability, signalled by the rise of
                        data management plans and data deposit requirements. Given the
                    self-replicating nature of DH practices through the apprenticeship model whereby
                    students work on large projects, mentorship will be a crucial factor in breaking
                    the cycle of unsustainable, boutique project building.

                James Cummings discusses two well-known digital edition projects, the CURSUS project and William
                        Godwin’s Diary. Both projects were severely endangered by the lack
                    of legacy planning. When key personnel are lost, and a project has no champion
                    at its host institution, the consequences can be disastrous, especially when the
                    project depends on a technical framework that is not part of the institution’s
                    core infrastructure. Both of these projects would have been completely lost
                    without Cummings’s persistent intervention.

                In telling two digital disaster stories, Sara Diamond reminds us that even the
                    most important and socially significant projects are subject to institutional
                    changes, career moves, and shifting priorities. The Banff New Media Institute
                    was deaccessioned after a leadership change, resulting in the overnight
                    disappearance of a vast archive of Indigenous art and history. The Daniel
                    Langlois Foundation archive survived only because of the determined efforts of
                    Jean Gagnon, on whose good will the project is still worryingly dependent.
                    Diamond’s own fonds and sub-collections have been built with the lessons of
                    these two experiences in mind. Ultimately, Diamond suggests that institutions, creators of archives and their users all bear
                        responsibility for the protection and continuity of those
                    archives.

                Nick Thieberger’s paper, on the monumental PARADISEC project, describes an
                    attempt to thwart the forces of entropy on a massive scale. PARADISEC has
                    rescued over 14,000 hours of field audio tape recordings representing over 1300
                    languages from the Pacific Region, and is hosting them in a public archive, as
                    well as attempting to return them in accessible format to the originating
                    Indigenous communities. This enormous project is itself facing resiliency
                    issues, since it has no stable funding and depends on a small team of dedicated
                    researchers, reminding us that the process of data rescue and retrieval may be
                    cyclical and repetitive without reliable commitments to long-term archiving.

                Like Battershill, Jessica Otis is concerned with deconstructing narratives — in
                    this case the funding narratives that suggest, erroneously, that DH projects are
                    either cash cows bringing money into the
                    institution via grants or free because of donated
                    scholarly labor. Having shown the hidden costs of project maintenance, Otis
                    discusses the prospects of obtaining long-term funding to sustain a project
                    beyond its initial grant-funding, the availability of hard-funded resources from
                    the institution, and the practical realism required to retool projects to fit
                    into sustainable long-term funding models.

                There is a traditional assumption that what matters about a digital project is
                    its data (however we might define that), rather than its web interface,
                    which is considered ephemeral. However, every session at the symposium touched
                    on the issue of interface, arguably the most recognizable and least preservable
                    part of a digital project. Preserving the look and feel of web-based digital
                    projects continues to be a challenge. Symposium attendees discussed the
                    possibility of doing video captures of website tours and archiving video along
                    with a digital project’s data. Diamond points to emulation as a preservation
                    strategy, and we can undoubtedly learn much from the work of electronic
                    literature scholars as well. Emulation is expensive in terms of hardware,
                    software, and maintenance, and perhaps only works like those described by
                    Diamond will merit such preservation.

                Our final two papers were not presented at the symposium. However, Holmes and
                    Takeda, as Endings team members and co-hosts of the symposium, shared their
                    ideas in the discussion. They approach the practical issues of project
                    resiliency from a technical point of view. Their role on the Endings team was to
                    develop the detailed guidelines and recommended practices that would govern the
                    rewriting of many HCMC projects as pure static websites, and then to put the
                    guidelines into practice, rebuilding a dozen or so existing HCMC projects in
                    Endings-compliant form. Along the way, they developed diagnostic tools and an
                    entirely static search engine that can be deployed for any static digital
                    edition.

                Coble and Karlin’s paper is a serendipitous addition to our collection; the
                    authors were not presenters at our symposium, but their paper is an apt
                    counterpoint to the other work on project resiliency. They examine not the
                    reliability of individual project data and outputs, but the larger web of
                    scholarly referencing within which they live. Their research looks at citations
                    of digital resources from articles in DHQ itself,
                    to see not just whether links still function, but also whether the resources to
                    which they point are the same resources the author intended to cite.

            

                Conclusions

                Sometimes things are meant to be ephemeral: there is ephemeral employment and
                    there are ephemeral products of scholarship, which is fine as long as
                    ephemerality is intentional. Yet the majority of DH projects find themselves in
                    the unfortunate position of being unintentionally ephemeral. One of the
                    anonymous reviewers of this issue made the point that we shouldn’t have to keep
                    making the point that digital projects need to be more robust and preservable.
                    The reviewer wondered why we are still having to advocate for what they
                    characterized as common knowledge and common sense. Taken together, the essays
                    in this collection show the difficulty of realizing common sense in practice.
                    The roots of this persistent problem are both social and technological.

                DH has a strong tradition of collaboration, which frequently includes
                    students, colleagues from across campus, and programmers, as well as librarians
                    and archivists. However, each group brings to the table its own cultural norms
                    and presuppositions, and each group works within existing structures of power,
                    funding, and promotion that are frequently at odds with one another.

                A faculty member who may want to launch a project quickly may be seduced by the
                    siren song of easy to deploy, which is nearly always at odds with
                    long-term survivability. A hastily-concocted Wordpress or Drupal site, although
                    ready for a promotion file — or replaced with the next big project — will be at
                    the mercy of how much time the scholar actually has to commit to regular updates
                    (usual answer: little to none). The programmer may resist the upfront work of
                    setting up a sustainable long-term platform because they are accustomed to
                    working with specific platform stacks and are tempted to fall back on what they
                    already know, or to pick up whatever library or platform is momentarily newest
                    and most interesting; projects built out of such a mindset will be at the mercy
                    of security vulnerabilities, software obsolescence, and personnel changes.
                    Librarians and archivists are constrained by a scarcity economy of space and
                    funding — it is easy to eschew preserving digital projects when you know it will
                    be impossible to maintain them. Although the dream of a universal library
                    is a beautiful ideal, it will nonetheless remain a fiction until we choose
                    universal technologies.

                The first stage in building an Endings-compliant project is having an honest
                    conversation among faculty, programmers, and librarians/archivists about
                    expectations, abilities, and sustainability that is agreed upon and documented.
                    This step should happen before the first byte is saved to disk. Normally trained
                    to work in solitude, faculty may need to rely on experts beyond their discipline
                    who work at a different pace. Programmers may have to be open to different ways
                    of programming and take the extra time to design for the eventual flattening of
                    sites even if a dynamic site is preferred for the length of the project (which
                    is perfectly fine, assuming there is funding and time for a complete rewrite at
                    the end). Librarians and archivists need to invest in people, services, and
                    technologies to sustain flat websites — which could simply be a server that is
                    part of the libraries’ long-term preservation plan. As this issue was being
                    created, the Diary of
                            Robert Graves project became the first archived DH project
                    at UVic Libraries, a process which was possible only because the site is Endings
                    compliant. UVic Libraries is committing to preserving flattened,
                    Endings-compliant sites as part of its preservation activities. It has taken
                    some time to reach this point and the process has involved stakeholders from
                    across the institution (Systems, Metadata, Digital Scholarship, and the
                    University Librarian's Office), but we’re here. Hosting a server for static
                    sites is eminently achievable for most university libraries. With collaboration
                    comes compromise in the name of long-term access and discoverability. Everyone
                    on the team needs to understand the needs and limitations of the others, while
                    also mutually agreeing to Endings Principles.

                Finally, if there’s one constant in DH, and computing in general, it is that
                    technologies will change. Our toolkit is not a technological solution that will
                    be out of date next year. Rather, it is a series of practices for you to
                    consider when starting your project. Moreover, each DH project exists within a
                    unique environment with unique challenges. We’ve thus made our recommendations
                    adaptable to any project, at any scale, with the hope of creating something
                    sustainable. Who knows what tomorrow will bring? What we do know is that the
                    fewer dependencies a digital edition has, the longer it is likely to last. The
                    first HTML page marked up by Tim Berners-Lee in 1991 is still renderable by
                    modern browsers..
                    Simplicity for the win.
            
