Title:  Learning Digital Humanities in a Community of
               Practice: the DEAR model of Postgraduate Research Training
Volume:  015
Issue:  3
Date:  October 15, 2021
Abstract:  
            
            To date, there has been relatively little discussion of how the UK doctoral funding
               landscape shapes digital humanities pedagogy for postgraduate research students. This
               article sets out to address this relative lack, by introducing the inter- and
               multi-disciplinary context in which many students in the UK work. We examine the
               phenomenon of students who are not necessarily interested in becoming DH
               practitioners, but have identified DH as a knowledge gap in their own disciplinary
               practice. Such a realisation changes the nature of the learner within DH communities
               of practice, requiring a different form of learning.
            This study therefore explores learning within a community of practice, the inter- and
               multi-disciplinary space in which digital humanities practitioners operate. First,
               drawing on the diverse disciplinary landscape, it highlights an individual's learning
               journey through self-determined learning (heutagogy). Second, it outlines an idea of
               digital humanities pedagogy for postgraduate research based on current frameworks of
               digital literacies and broader researcher development in the UK, framing research
               activity as learning. Third, it presents the DEAR model for learning and teaching
               design, which is based on four principles: Diversity; Employability; Application; and
               Reflection. Finally, it provides an evaluation of the DEAR model in the context of
               one UK Doctoral Training Partnership (DTP). It contributes to understanding of
               pedagogical practices for doctoral-level DH training and provides a set of
               recommendations for instructors to adopt and adapt these pedagogical principles in
               their own programmes.
         
Full Body Text: 

            Introduction
            Despite the growth of digital humanities (DH) centres and programmes during the last
               twenty years, the provision of digital humanities training in the United Kingdom is
               still unevenly distributed across universities and varies in format from dedicated
               Masters and Doctoral programmes to more informal seminars and research groups. For
               smaller or less research-intensive institutions, the establishment of a digital
               humanities programme usually begins with the recruitment of a single specialist
               lecturer , who may however struggle to cover the breadth
               of expertise required to provide suitably wide-spectrum teaching. While a number of
               doctoral students may want to undertake a specific digital humanities PhD supervised
               by a specialist, many may desire to acquire digital humanities skills without wanting
               to specialise in the field and make it the centre of their research career. UK Arts
               and Humanities PhD programmes are not as structured as their US counterparts, though
               students are required to do a certain amount of training 
               . The direction of the training is left largely to the
               students’ own choice; a form of hidden curriculum
               
               . 
            The provision of DH training at PhD level in the UK is shaped by the cyclical nature
               of the funding context. Since the early 2000s, the funding of doctoral training in
               the UK has moved away from single institutions or individual studentships towards
               building multi-institution clusters. Initially focused on a regional basis, the
               approach later moved to more multi-layered geographical models, with
               research-intensive universities securing a prominent role in the new structures . The eleven Doctoral Training Partnerships (DTPs) funded
               by the UK Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC) offer participating
               universities the possibility of pooling the expertise of individual specialists to
               provide more extensive coverage, especially in emerging areas such as DH (see Figure 1). 
            
               Number of institutions which are members of UK Doctoral Training Partnerships
                  (DTPs) in 2019.
               
            
            One of the DTPs included in our survey is the Consortium of Humanities and Arts
               South-East England (CHASE) DTP . Founded in 2014 as part
               of the DTP1 funding round, it initially comprised seven institutions: the
               universities of East Anglia; Essex; Kent; Sussex; Goldsmiths, University of London;
               the Courtauld Institute; The Open University. Two more joined in 2016: Birkbeck
               College and the School of Oriental and African Studies. CHASE is now proceeding with
               a revised membership for its DTP2 second phase, during 2019-2024. This research is
               concerned with CHASE phase 1, the period 2014-2019, during which CHASE offered
               seventy-five doctoral studentships per annum, enrolling a total of 373 students over
               five years.Personal correspondence with Clare Hunt, CHASE Doctoral Training
                  Partnership Coordinator, 13 June 2019. This article will discuss the
               implementation of a DH training programme in the CHASE DTP.
            The provision of training is a central element of doctoral funding in the UK, in
               keeping with the findings of the 2001 Roberts Review  and
               the 2010 Hodge Review , which both recommended the
               inclusion of skills training within doctoral education, with a particular emphasis on
               transferable skills. From 2014 to 2019 CHASE employed its Cohort Development
                  FundSee https://www.chase.ac.uk/cdf-open-call.  to initiate training
               programmes in three broad areas: Advanced Research Craft, Future Humanities and
               Public Humanities. Each year, a competitive bidding process allocated funding to both
               staff- and student-led training programmes, leading to the development of a number of
               initiatives. Once funding had been allocated and a programme established, students
               were invited to apply for training places. During Phase 1 of the DTP, priority was
               given to students in receipt of a CHASE studentship, while other PhD students at
               CHASE institutions were usually allowed to apply if sufficient places were available. 
            Digital humanities was immediately identified as a priority area and regarded as an
               essential element in the training opportunities offered to CHASE students. During
               this period, the CHASE institutions displayed varying degrees of involvement with
               digital humanities, ranging from the foundation of a multimillion-pound centre (the
               Sussex Humanities Lab, launched in 2015), to the appointment of individual digital
               humanities staff (Open University, East Anglia, Essex, Kent), to research and
               teaching events on specific sections of DH or adjacent areas (such as Digital Media
               at Goldsmiths, Digital Literary Studies at Birkbeck, Digital Art History at the
               Courtauld). In none was digital humanities an established part of formal
               undergraduate or postgraduate curriculum, though more informal training opportunities
               were developed during the life of the consortium. While making it difficult for any
               single institution to sustain a digital humanities training programme on its own, the
               diversity of approaches and expertise present within CHASE had the potential to
               provide a rich and diverse corpus of teachers.
            This article introduces a new model of DH pedagogy (the DEAR model) and uses the
               example of the CHASE Arts and Humanities in the Digital Age (AHDA) programme in the
               context of the UK DTP framework. The AHDA programme was launched in 2015 by an
               interdisciplinary team led by The Open University and the University of East Anglia.
               It was allocated £15,000-£20,000 per annum by the CHASE Training and Development fund
               to cover staff and student travel, seminar organisation and a certain amount of staff
               time, with additional staff time provided as an in-kind contribution. It concluded
               with the end of the first phase of CHASE in Summer 2019, after having trained over
               one hundred students.
            There have been previous approaches to training provision in digital humanities for
               research students. The Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC) funded an
               initiative for doctoral students in the UK called Collaborative Digital Research in
               the Humanities (CEDAR) (2008-2010). It had three main aims:
            
               to further the understanding and expertise of doctoral students in the
                  humanities in the use of hypermedia and other digital humanities research tools; 
               to bring together humanities doctoral students in a way that will ensure
                  current and future peer-led development in this area;
               to offer examples of good practice and innovation in the use of new
                  technologies in the humanities .
            
            CEDAR was a bold first step in the UK at creating inter-institutional training for
               doctoral students on the eve of the creation of the Doctoral Training Partnerships.
               However, the focus at that time was largely around how digital technology was
               changing the ways that academics worked by sharing and modifying content. The depth
               of understanding around the nature of data in the humanities, and the value of
               quantitative and qualitative research methods, was at the time very limited.
               Similarly, the Praxis Network project provides a snapshot from 2017 of eight
               postgraduate-level programmes in digital humanities at institutions in the UK, US,
               and New Zealand. The project aims to emphasize new models of
                  methodological training and collaborative research
                in the digital humanities. However, digital humanities
               programmes are still relatively uncommon in the UK, and none has explicitly addressed
               how the various motivations and expectations of participants shape the extent of
               their desired participation in digital humanities as a community of practice. 
            We will therefore consider how DH training might be embedded within a student’s
               broader learning journey with reference to the CHASE AHDA programme. First, we will
               analyse how self-determined learning and working within a community of practice
               combine in DH pedagogy to support heutagogical learning in DH. Second, we will define
               digital humanities pedagogy in the context of postgraduate researcher training.
               Third, we will introduce our model, the DEAR model, based on abstracted principles
               from the applied pedagogy that could be adapted to account for locally informed
               pedagogical practice. These principles are: Diversity; Employability; Application;
               and Reflection. Fourth, we will demonstrate and evaluate how we have instantiated the
               DEAR model into the CHASE Arts and Humanities in the Digital Age (AHDA) training
               programme. In doing so, this paper will make a significant contribution to our
               understanding of pedagogical practices for doctoral-level DH training by reflecting
               on how the DEAR model can be adapted to other contexts, and provide a set of
               recommendations for doing so. 
         

            Learning in a Community of Practice
            The introduction of the DTP2 funding round (2019-2024) is changing the funding
               context, making this an opportune moment to reflect upon DTP1. We therefore aimed to
               provide a snapshot of the UK digital humanities provision at a time that coincided
               with the end of the DTP1 five-year funding cycle. In June 2019, we surveyed data from
               FindaMasters and FindaPhD, two of the most commonly used search websites for
               postgraduate programmes. The syllabi of these MAs/PhDs were not examined, meaning
               that this data refers only to programmes that explicitly mention DH. Of 350
               advertised MA programmes, eleven could be identified as digital humanities. Of twenty
               PhD studentships, only one mentioned both digital and humanities. It is
               worth noting that most PhD scholarships are advertised in the period
               October-December, so we conducted our survey during a time when fewer opportunities
               would be on offer. However, even this survey suggests that digital humanities are not
               explicitly mentioned in the majority of the programmes listed in the most widely used
               MA/PhD search websites. Our brief analysis also flagged up different terminologies,
               levels of self-identification and organisational alignment with digital humanities,
               coupled with conflicting definitions of the field. 
            Another significant result of our survey was the geographical distribution of these
               programmes. Of the eleven MAs advertised, eight were based in London, with the rest
               of the country, especially England, being severely underrepresented (one course was
               offered in Scotland and one in Wales). Only four of the eleven DTPs were included in
               the offer of MA and PhD programmes in DH. Overall, this suggests that DH is rarely
               the main focus of postgraduate learning in the United Kingdom. As a result, it is
               important to reflect upon the challenge of providing DH training in a
               multidisciplinary environment where students’ primary focus is at the subject level.
               Whether English Language and Literature, History, or Art and Design, many students
               ground their training needs first and foremost within their own disciplinary context.
               It is therefore important to their development to understand how disciplinarity has
               been addressed within the digital humanities. 
            
               Inter/multidisciplinary
               To take into account the broad disciplinary perspectives of our students, we have
                  sought not to centre our pedagogical approach on a strict definition of the
                  digital humanities. In this we take our lead from scholars such as Lisa Spiro, who
                  describes the digital humanities as a convergence of several
                     sets of values, including those of the humanities; libraries, museums and
                     cultural heritage organizations; and networked culture
                  . All of these groups have been represented in the CHASE
                  AHDA programme, and each faces the challenge of defining how their established
                  practices relate to the inter- and multi-disciplinary communities that constitute
                  DH. In 2011, Matthew Jockers and Glenn Worthey coined the highly influential
                  concept of the Big Tent to express the diversity of DH practices, noting
                  their wonder and appreciation for the many-splendored field
                     of DH
                   in a move that was designed to be highly inclusionary
                  and participatory. Simultaneously joyful and pragmatic , the big tent also had the unintended effect of erasing the multifarious
                  disciplinary traditions – effectively grouping everybody into a single amorphous
                  space which, by erasing the barriers between disciplines, in fact worked to ensure
                  that traditionally powerful scholarly traditions dominated the conversation. Klein (1990) has noted that interdisciplinarity
                  relies on some form of demarcation between the disciplines in question, and the
                  push back against the unintended erasure of smaller disciplinary traditions via
                  the big tent has been characterised by a similar logic. 
               Klein, while recognising the broad scope and significance of interdisciplinarity,
                  notes that cutting across all the various theories is one recurring idea: that it
                     is a means of solving problems and answering questions
                     that cannot be satisfactorily addressed using single methods or
                     approaches
                  . The extent to which the digital humanities
                  truly engage with various disciplines has been contested ,
                  and indeed attention has fallen in recent years upon how it represents and
                  exchanges knowledge with other meta-disciplines such as Library and Information
                  Studies . 
               This view follows on from McCarty and Short’s work to map the extent of humanities
                  computing, the forerunner term to digital humanities. Their work resulted in the
                  creation of a methodological commons which presented
                  DH as a series of convergence points between the various disciplines, and focusing
                  upon methods and tools that were considered essential to the DH community . The nature of this collaboration, or this community of
                  practice, in DH has been heavily discussed over the years. Several models have
                  been introduced, which expand upon or provide alternatives to Melissa Terras’
                  notation of the concept of communities of practice .
                  Terras considered whether or not digital humanities (as we now understand it) was
                  actually a discipline or a community of practice. The former has a more
                  institutionalised presence as well as an international community; the latter, a
                  group which shares theories of meaning and power,
                     collectivity and subjectivity... but is little more than a support network for
                     academic scholars who use outlier methods in their own individual
                     fields
                  . Terras’ conclusion is that digital humanities seems
                  to act like a discipline, but without the institutional acceptance of a subject:
                     ...the community exists, and functions, and has found a
                     way to continue disseminating its knowledge and encouraging others into the
                     community without the institutionalization of the subject
                  .
               This desire to encourage others to participate effectively in DH has led to a
                  great deal of work in relation to the nature of these communities of practice. In
                  his influential account, Ray Siemens ruminates on the careful balance that must be
                  found between preserving an element of disciplinarity, on the one hand, and
                  adopting a more revolutionary approach to DH: When we do
                        try to define in a way that can lead to action...there’s a loss via
                        disciplinarity’s constraint in light of current and future growth, narrowing
                        potential collaborative opportunities… Conversely, we can choose to ignore
                        disciplinary and institutional structures, adopting the revolutionary
                        approach we find reflected in the several excellent manifestos existing in
                        the area… but, in ignoring those structures, we run the risk of losing
                        access to their benefits.
                      Siemens, however, focuses upon the
                  collective nature of this relationship, arguing that this community contains
                  people who have identified
                   with the community of practice. The notable and
                  admirable focus on collectivism here, then, begins to build a definition for DH of
                  those who are a self-selecting part of the recognised DH community. Within this
                  context, Siemens’ repeated discussion of the term we - who we are via what it is we do, where we do what we do, and why we do it in
                     the way that we do it
                   becomes a carefully constrained collective that may
                  even have limited relevance to those who do not want to identify with the DH
                  community. Yet, as we have found through our training programme, the
                  non-identifying DHer represents a significant proportion of those reaching out for
                  relevant training. Thus it is essential for us to consider how other models – of
                  DH, of pedagogy, and of learning – might support such learners to engage with
                  critical digital humanities practices in a meaningful way, by which we mean in a
                  way that can be successfully operationalised in the individual’s own work.
               Svensson borrows the notion of trading zones to
                  describe places where interdisciplinary work occurs and where
                     different traditions are maintained at the same time as intersectional work is
                     carried out
                  . He argues that the digital humanities can become an
                  intersectional meeting place where scholars can maximise points of interaction and
                  facilitate deep praxis-led interactions. However, as Terras (2006) notes, we are still talking here primarily about a
                  research environment rather than a learning environment. What we are often doing,
                  then, is encouraging students to enter the DH space through meta-debates that are
                  focused upon effective research rather than effective learning. Indeed, Claire
                  Warwick has challenged the orthodoxy assuming that a single form of DH will emerge
                  that encompasses all relevant parties, noting the likelihood
                     that different schools and methods of doing DH will emerge
                  . What, however, is most relevant to the discussion of
                  research training is that despite their importance to the field of DH,
                  meta-debates are not obvious to newcomers, and are indeed not often relevant.
                  Instead, we have found through the CHASE AHDA programme that the key sticking
                  point for many participants is working out how to operationalise new forms of
                  intellectual and technical practice into their existing humanistic modes of study.
                  As such, the otherwise essential work on communities of practice emphasises
                  characteristics of collectivism in DH research that are to some extent
                  incompatible with the more self-directed individual learning journey that many new
                  entrants to DH embark upon. 
               Interdisciplinary learning, though, offers a degree of guidance in navigating this
                  tension between the community and the individual learner. Indeed, we will argue
                  that groupwork is essential within this individual learning journey in order to
                  expose learners to other disciplinary perspectives, and is a key facet of learning
                  in this context. Klein’s notions of the pedagogy of interdisciplinarity, for
                  instance, share an intellectual core with the structure of the CHASE AHDA program.
                  For instance, she notes that both DH and interdisciplinary learning are active and dynamic. Group work and projects are common and,
                     echoing the constructivist theory of learning, students build new knowledge
                     through exploration and the actual doing of a subject
                  . Many existing training programmes emphasise and
                  reinforce the idea that there is a core set of competencies and methods that are
                  central to DH. This is a matter of necessity, but one great strength of the
                  collaborative doctoral training system in the United Kingdom is that it encourages
                  interdisciplinary and collective solutions from staff that support individual
                  learning from learners. 
            
            
               Digital Humanities and Self-Determined Learning
               Many of our students on CHASE AHDA have been more focused on their individual
                  learning journey. Indeed, the programme has welcomed the full spectrum of
                  attendees from those who intend to pursue DH-related careers, to those with an
                  interest in learning more about the field, through to those who are solely
                  interested in how to operationalise and understand specific DH competencies in
                  their own work. This means that individuals must learn about the methods and tools
                  that are available to them, how they individually relate to DH, and how that
                  influences their own learning. We turn here to the literature on self-determined
                  learning to propose that it must sit alongside community-driven active learning in
                  order to maximise the benefits to participants from diverse backgrounds. Our model
                  for CHASE AHDA thus emphasises two key points: self-determined, reflective
                  learning, and scaffolding of sessions via active learning and groupwork. As we
                  will outline here, this allows learners to create their own learning communities,
                  not as spaces for research practice, but as networks to facilitate and support
                  their own individual learning approaches. To this end, the concept of heutagogical
                  learning has been largely underexplored in relation to DH pedagogy.
               The term heutagogy was introduced by Stewart Hase and
                     Chris Kenyon (2013) to represent the study of self-determined learning.
                  They draw upon Knowles’ definition of self-directed learning as: The process in which individuals take the initiative, with or
                        without the help of others, in diagnosing their learning needs, formulating
                        learning goals, identifying human and material resources for learning,
                        choosing and implementing learning strategies, and evaluating learning
                        outcomes .
                      Importantly, though, they view
                  heutagogy as a less linear, and more intuitive and unplanned process. Hase and
                  Kenyon emphasise that heutagogical learning emphasizes flexibility, in that the
                  teacher provides resources but the learner designs their own course and, if
                  appropriate, the assessment . A heutagogically-centred
                  approach for DH, then, relies upon the ability of learners to access resources
                  with relevance to their own learning, and to develop their own journey through the
                  material in a way that helps them to define and obtain their own desired outcomes.
                  While structured workshops play a vital role in imparting often highly technical
                  information to learners, and do so within the CHASE AHDA programme, it suddenly
                  becomes hugely important to provide a highly reflective space that allows learners
                  time to consider these aspects of their learning. The question of reflection has
                  been under-investigated but not ignored in DH pedagogy. Mahony et al. provide a
                  valuable account of the role of reflection in Masters’ study, for example . The focus and value here is around doctoral learning,
                  which should address higher-order thinking, and ultimately support an original
                  contribution to knowledge, a key tenet of research degree programmes in the UK,
                  and arguably worldwide . Heutagogy, within this context,
                  represents a shift towards the learner that facilitates such a reflective turn. 
               In a subsequent article, Hase noted that heutagogy: suggests that learning is an extremely complex process that occurs within
                        the learner, is unobserved and is not tied in some magical way to the
                        curriculum. Learning is associated with making new linkages in the brain
                        involving ideas, emotions, and experiences that lead to new understandings
                        about self or the world.
                      While much of the heutagogical literature
                  refers to online learning, it is characterised by several aspects that provide a
                  useful framework for student-led learning in DH: self-determined learning, in
                  which individuals take the initiative to diagnose their learning needs and engage
                  with resources in a way that leads to new understandings ; group collaboration, via active learning and creation ; and a reflective approach to identifying and
                  evaluating learners’ own learning outcomes. These all provide a useful pivot point
                  that aligns the approach of the CHASE AHDA programme more closely with those
                  models of DH that emphasise not only communities of practice that have been
                  discussed here, but the ways in which diverse individual and disciplinary
                  backgrounds inform how participants approach their learning in DH. 
               As such, while DH emphases the collaborative, the interdisciplinary, and the
                  community-driven aspects of its praxis, its training is often centred on a
                  self-determined journey of discovery. Stories abound of the autodidact in DH, the
                  individual who was forced to teach themselves due to a lack of external training.
                  There is an element of necessity in this – while many aspects of method, approach,
                  even theory, can transfer across the disciplines that represent the DH community
                  of practice, a new entrant is faced with the challenging prospect of working out
                  how to apply these myriad contexts to their own work. It is therefore essential
                  for them to be given the space to reflect upon their own journey, to adopt a
                  heutagogic approach to their learning that helps them to shape and decide their
                  level of engagement with the research-focused community of practice that sits a
                  step beyond the methodological commons of DH practice situated within various
                  disciplines. 
               Yet, as DH training becomes an ever-more embedded, but sadly under-theorised, area
                  of focus for the community, the question of how to balance the needs at the
                  various points of the learner spectrum becomes a highly pressing concern. As the
                  following section will indicate, the framework outlined here gives us a structure
                  upon which we, as professionals with DH-related positions, might leverage our
                  broader understanding of the field in a way that promotes the self-determined
                  model of learning that is necessary to support a diverse body of learners.
            
            
               Digital Humanities pedagogy in the context of postgraduate researcher
                  training.
               In addition to the tension between collectivism and individual direction in
                  research practice, there is a further layer of complexity as this takes place
                  within specific higher education structures. The increased formal presence of DH
                  in universities and DTPs has an influence on who attends certain training
                  programmes. Where there is a strong local presence of DH, students are likely to
                  use that provision first, as opposed to a cross-institutional programme provided
                  by the DTP. 
               A digital humanities pedagogy for research training therefore needs to be mindful
                  of the quasi-disciplinary community it speaks to and the ability of students to
                  apply skills and behaviours locally within their own institution. This will depend
                  on the degree to which DH has been embedded alongside the other fundamentals of
                  their discipline. One of the dimensions that has been crucial in the DTP training
                  context is employability. For example, the CHASE DTP currently provides students
                  with the opportunity to undertake a three-month paid internship with a partner
                  organisations in the GLAM (galleries, libraries, archives and museums) sector . As a result, students are coming to programmes such
                  as the CHASE AHDA with objectives that include enhancing future employment
                  prospects .
               The primarily US-oriented literature has addressed such learner motivations. Leigh Bonds (2014), for instance, has written on the
                  preparation and delivery of undergraduate courses that include both the
                  employability dimension, which is also a feature of researcher development, and
                     project-based learning; an approach relevant to
                  our model of training. Margaret Konkol (2015),
                  however, has highlighted some of the inherent assumptions around learning and
                  research outputs around digital humanities in US institutions (and arguably those
                  in the UK as well). The difference that Konkol identifies is the apparent
                  distinction between the two terms: digital humanities and digital
                     pedagogy, in which the latter is classified as the
                     light and lively little sister whose ability to use digital tools in the
                     classroom engages students in a variety of interactive learning formats
                  .
               Konkol’s digital pedagogy resembles digital literacies in the UK (Figure 2); functional skills aimed at employability
                  which can be readily embedded in undergraduate programmes, with defined learning
                  outcomes. However, research activities that may receive more substantial funding
                  tend to sit apart from learning and teaching conceptually. The real
                  academic work is assumed to take place within such projects. 
               In many ways, universities and digital humanities teachers can draw on a digital
                  literacy framework in the UK to structure their approach, but the functional
                  skills, such as learning Python syntax to extract textual data from different
                  source files (ICT literacy), are not in isolation training in digital
                  humanities.
               Digital literacies are defined by JISC as those capabilities
                     which fit an individual for living, learning and working in a digital
                     society
                  . Although frequently considered in relation to
                  undergraduate and Masters programmes, which are highly structured through taught
                  programmes, they are clearly applicable to researchers, and particularly those
                  whose work focuses on or utilises digital resources.
               
                  The seven elements of digital literacies ©Jisc CC BY-NC-ND https://www.jisc.ac.uk/guides/developing-digital-literacies
                  
                  
               
               These seven elements have a clear employability dimension, and are intentionally
                  transferable from the formal learning environment of the university classroom, to
                  other sectors and industries. They are also compatible with the recommendations of
                  research training formulated since the 2002 reviews 
                  , and they also map onto several subdomains of the Vitae
                  Researcher Development Framework (RDF) (Figure 3),
                  namely Knowledge Base (A1), which comprises information seeking, literacy and
                  management, as well as Professional and Career Development (B3) and Working with
                  Others (D1).
               
                  The Vitae Researcher Development Framework, from https://www.vitae.ac.uk/researchers-professional-development/about-the-vitae-researcher-development-framework/developing-the-vitae-researcher-development-framework
                  
                  
               
               The challenge for those in the UK who support doctoral researchers is to develop
                  these digital literacies across a range of disciplines and fields at a research
                  level, rather than embed them in undergraduate programmes.
               One of the reasons that the pedagogy around digital literacies is so challenging
                  is that it contains seven elements that work as part of a longer developmental
                  process, and one which is seen as very much bound up with the student’s own
                  identity . Research training as a whole can be seen as
                  remedial, with digital literacies becoming part of a deficit model in higher
                  education , the aim being to embed functional
                  skills to enable the student to complete their research in a timely fashion, and
                  hence reduce risks around non-completion and low employability. This has been a
                  particular concern in doctoral education in the US in recent years 
                  . 
               Konkol’s point here is that this distinction is false. Digital humanities work
                  entails learning, (few researchers begin research fully-equipped to undertake it)
                  and students can learn through involvement in and contribution to real-world
                  projects: this is how a digital humanities pedagogy is applied. In short, and in
                  the applied context of research training, we have taken digital humanities
                  pedagogy to mean digital humanities combined with digital pedagogy. 
               
                  Core Elements of a Digital Humanities Pedagogy
                  Reviewing the last decade of digital literacies and digital humanities
                     pedagogy, it is clear that researcher developers need to look broadly at the
                     context of the modern doctorate, the design of undergraduate teaching using
                     project-based learning, digital literacies, employability, and the nature of
                     digital humanities as a community of practice to inform the structure of formal
                     programmes. The CEDAR programme mentioned earlier focused primarily on digital
                     literacies, whereas there is a need for a model that encompasses the complexity
                     of postgraduate researcher training. CEDAR encountered challenges around the
                     diversity of backgrounds of students, which reflects Taylor, Kiley and
                     Humphrey’s  observation about the present diversity
                     of the doctoral candidate population worldwide.
                  In drawing together these phenomena at research degree level, we can discern
                     several core principles: 
                  
                     Programme design should embrace diversity of candidates’ a) disciplinary
                        backgrounds and b) technical proficiencies
                     Learning outcomes should reflect candidates’ priorities around
                        employability, in terms of transferable ICT skills and disciplinary
                        expertise
                     Learning should emphasise application and preferably involve the design,
                        execution and evaluation of a project
                     Learning should emphasise reflection on a) individual abilities and b)
                        attitudes and behaviours towards others in the digital humanities
                        community
                  
                  We can visualise these principles as core elements to underpin learning and
                     teaching, which we present in Figure 4 as the
                        DEAR model:
                  
                     The DEAR model
                     
                  
                  Although there are clear challenges to embedding each of these elements, they
                     should function and be taught interdependently. For example, significant
                     differences in technical proficiencies (diversity) can be supported and
                     improved through initial reflection by candidates on their current abilities
                     and aspirations (employability), as well as the nature of the application; most
                     projects do not rely on all team members having the same skill sets, nor do
                     individual projects require an individual to have a high level of proficiency
                     in all skills. The skills and competencies need to match the
                        aims of the project. This is true of any doctoral research; digital
                     humanities projects are no exception.
                  In the following section we will consider how this self-determined approach to
                     learning and engagement with a community of practice supports a digital
                     humanities pedagogy. We will do so with reference to the CHASE AHDA programme,
                     which embodies many aspects of the pedagogical DEAR model proposed here.
               
            
            
               The CHASE AHDA programme
               This section demonstrates and evaluates how the principles of the DEAR model were
                  instantiated in the CHASE AHDA programme. The programme was enabled by a yearly
                  grant from the CHASE Training and Development Group, which was allocated each year
                  during the period 2014-2019 through a competitive bidding process. The grant
                  covered staff travel and subsistence while teaching on the programme, catering for
                  staff and students and honoraria for a small number of external speakers. Staff
                  time and room use were provided as an in-kind contribution from CHASE member
                  institutions. No charge was levied for enrolling in the programme, but students
                  were responsible for their own travel costs, except for overnight accommodation at
                  residential workshops, which was covered by the yearly grant. Students who
                  received their doctoral scholarship from CHASE had access to a £1,000 individual
                  research allowance, which they could employ to travel to the course workshops.
               The first iteration of AHDA in 2014/15 experimented with a multi-site approach
                  based on independently-held seminars on a number of Digital Humanities subjects,
                  which experienced quite variable levels of attendance. While each seminar provided
                  in-depth training on a given area, the CHASE Training and Development Group
                  remarked upon the lack of a unifying vision for the programme. In order to address
                  these issues, the core AHDA team, led by Francesca Benatti (Open University),
                  Matthew Sillence (University of East Anglia) and Paul Gooding (then University of
                  East Anglia) decided from 2015/16 to provide a more directed programme delivered
                  in one centralised and easily accessible location, The Open University in London
                  regional office. After Paul Gooding’s move to the University of Glasgow, David
                  King (Open University) joined the core AHDA team for the 2018/19 academic
                  year.
               The emphasis of the revised programme was to provide a more coherent structure
                  with clearly defined outcomes in terms of employability skills, allowing space for
                  the application of DH research skills within a short project. At the same time,
                  students would be invited to reflect upon their degree of participation in the
                  digital humanities community, taking into account the diversity of their
                  backgrounds and goals. The structure of the course was therefore revised and
                  rebuilt around 
               
                  a three-day residential winter school (December or January)
                  four one-day methods-based workshops (January - April)
                  a two-day mid-project residential (March)
                  a final plenary session (April or May)
               
               Below we assess how the programme employed the DEAR pedagogical model to achieve
                  its outcomes within the remit provided by the CHASE DTP. 
               
                  Winter School
                  The 2014/15 iteration of the AHDA programme had shown the promise and
                     challenges of digital humanities training. Following informal consultations in
                     2015 with Digital Humanities colleagues and with the CHASE Training and
                     Development Group, it was decided to open all following presentations of AHDA
                     with a three-day residential Winter School, which took place in December or
                     January. The aim of this intensive residential opening was to enable the
                     students to reflect upon their prior knowledge of Digital Humanities and their
                     expectations for the course. In addition, a venue was provided for students to
                     begin to consider their desired degree of participation in the digital
                     humanities community. A public blog was maintained for each year, providing
                     information on programme details, booking links, and access to learning materials
                        https://chasedigitalage.wordpress.com/
                     . Over its four iterations, the Winter School was attended by fifteen to
                     twenty-five students each year, with numbers capped at twenty students per
                     programme from 2017/18 onwards. The event consisted of 
                  
                     a plenary lecture by leading CHASE Digital Humanities scholars
                     a number of introductory 2-hour seminars from the AHDA core team and from
                        the teachers of the subsequent workshops, including
                           Digitisation and metadata
                           Text analysis
                           Data visualisation
                           Image analysis
                           Threshold concepts as a critical learning framework
                           Project management 
                        
                     
                     a final student-led unconference focusing on the practical group
                        project that would form the main application of their learning
                  
                  The residential school format has widespread precedents in Digital Humanities
                     pedagogy, such as for example the Digital Humanities Summer Institute (DHSI)
                        https://dhsi.org/
                      and the Digital Humanities at Oxford Summer School (DH@OxSS)
                        https://www.dhoxss.net/
                     . For the AHDA programme, it was found to offer considerable benefits
                     but also some significant disadvantages, due to the diversity of the student
                     population. An intensive, face-to-face experience allowed the students to
                     participate in a more in-depth introduction to the variety of Digital
                     Humanities approaches. Additionally, it permitted students from different
                     universities and departments to develop connections based on common or
                     contiguous interests, building a sense of membership in a shared student
                     cohort. Finally, it was central to the definition and allocation of group
                     projects, which formed a central part of the application of the students’
                     learning. 
                  The four iterations of the Winter School confirmed the validity of this
                     approach but also highlighted its exclusionary impact on certain categories of
                     students, with the potential to negatively affect student diversity.
                     Specifically, students with disabilities, caring duties or additional
                     commitments (for example, those undertaking part-time study) were found to
                     experience difficulties in attending the Winter School or in committing to its
                     full duration. Mitigation strategies were gradually put in place and included
                     the prior circulation of teaching materials and handouts, culminating finally
                     in the video capture of the directed teaching component of the School from
                     2017/18 onwards. However, the seminar-style discussions and group-based
                     exercises could not be captured for data protection reasons.
                  Contents were pitched at an introductory level, assuming no prior familiarity
                     with Digital Humanities methodologies and debates. The diversity of the student
                     cohorts was the main reason for this choice. While CHASE is a specialist Art
                     and Humanities partnership, student backgrounds were nonetheless quite
                     disparate, including a range of subjects such as digital humanities,
                     musicology, practical digital arts, social sciences, literature, art history,
                     history, visual arts/visual anthropology and media studies. Figure 5 groups them on the basis of the UK
                     Research Excellence Framework (REF) Units of Assessment
                        https://www.ref.ac.uk/panels/units-of-assessment/
                     . 
                  
                     Disciplinary backgrounds of CHASE AHDA students grouped by UK REF Units
                        of Assessment.
                     
                  
                  Though a growing number of students joined AHDA because of an interest in
                     digital media and culture, over the five iterations students presented with
                     variable levels of digital skills, ranging from programming to video editing to
                     basic digital literacy skills. Rather than force the more novice students to
                     catch up on their own, the Winter School was designed to develop a common basis
                     through intensive training. Topics discussed included what were labelled the building blocks of Digital Humanities:
                     digitisation and metadata, basic text analysis and web authoring. All topics
                     were taught in two-hours sessions, which included both a lecture and a
                     practical applied component through in-class exercises. The exercises, carried
                     out in small groups, offered a first chance for students of different prior
                     skill levels to enter into a dialogue and begin to collaborate. 
                  Transferable skills for employability were further developed with the
                     introduction of a session on project management from 2017/2018 onwards.
                     According to a recent report, unlike their colleagues in STEM, UK Arts and
                     Humanities PhD students are less likely to be motivated to undertake doctoral
                     study by the opportunity to develop transferable skills , despite the fact that roughly 75% of those who move
                     into non-academic careers undertake non-research roles . The CHASE AHDA team therefore viewed it as
                     essential to introduce students to the skills that could be mapped to Domains C
                     and D of the Vitae Researcher Development Framework, especially around Research
                     Management (C2) and Working with Others (D1) (see Figure 3). A half-day project management workshop was delivered in
                     collaboration with the British Library, one of the CHASE non-academic partner
                     institutions, and by CHASE team members with project management expertise. In
                     2019, we also partnered with the Royal Society, the School of Advanced Studies,
                     and digital consultancy company Digirati to provide a workshop to evaluate the
                     Science in the Making platform, where students worked alongside cross-sectoral
                     partners to support further development of the user interface and functionality
                     of the resource.
                        https://scienceinthemakingblog.wordpress.com/
                     
                  
                  A significant reflective element was provided by a session on threshold
                     concepts, which asked the students to consider the motivations and modalities
                     of their learning journey . Through threshold
                     concepts, students were asked to examine the process of learning, focusing on
                     their expectations of transformative and integrative enhancement to their
                     education through their participation in AHDA . The
                     decision to include this component was led by research showing the benefit of
                     aiding students in the development of an explicit conceptual framework to
                     support doctoral learning . At the Winter School,
                     students were asked to define their research problems and to organise their
                     research design for the upcoming group or individual project, with further
                     assessments of their implementation and their conceptual conclusions in the
                     middle and at the end of the entire AHDA programme. They were also asked to
                     situate their participation in AHDA within their broader learning and career
                     goals.
                  The Winter School was designed to allow the students to combine an individual
                     learning journey with taking the first steps into a digital humanities
                     community of practice. After the 2016/17 academic year, teacher-led plenary
                     sessions were replaced with presentations from AHDA alumni who evaluated the
                     programme and its impact on their employability, for example by enabling them
                     to join Digital Humanities projects as interns or team members. This
                     heutagogical approach culminated in a one-day student-led unconference,
                     during which students were asked to propose a research project, usually focused
                     on their own research interests, and to pitch it to their fellow students.
                     Votes were then cast to choose which four projects would be developed during
                     the remainder of the AHDA course, with students choosing which project group to
                     join. AHDA team members then provided the students with advice on methodologies
                     and resources for their projects. 
                  While this process enabled students with more developed plans for their
                     learning journey to expand them through the help of their peers, feedback
                     collected over the first three iterations led to the introduction of individual
                     projects. The latter were found to enable greater dialogue between the
                     interdisciplinarity of Digital Humanities methods and the diversity of the
                     students’ disciplinary backgrounds and interests. This grounding in the
                     students’ own priorities helped them to remain motivated for the duration of
                     the programme and to assess the relevance of their learning to their future
                     employability. The initial presentation and the subsequent iterative refinement
                     of the project ideas through peer and teacher feedback were retained even with
                     the individual projects approach.
               
               
                  Follow-on workshops
                  After the Winter School, students had further opportunities to self-direct the
                     course of their learning. Between 2015/16 and 2017/18, students were able to
                     choose between two and four one-day workshops, held face-to-face over the
                     course of three months (January to April). The syllabus as initially proposed
                     aspired to provide an overview of the main areas of Digital Humanities research
                     as as reflected in the expertise present within scholars from CHASE and the
                     British Library, who delivered workshops on the following topics:
                  
                     Text Analysis for History and Literature
                     Digital Images and Digital Art History
                     Databases
                     Information Visualisation
                  
                  While the topics above were appreciated by the students, they were not equally
                     relevant to all of the students’ diverse disciplinary backgrounds and to all of
                     their employability goals. This element of self-direction led to an excessive
                     dispersion of a small student cohort, with certain seminars being poorly
                     attended. More broadly, it reduced the development of a common grounding in
                     digital humanities methods and perspectives. 
                  The emphasis of the AHDA programme shifted gradually from teaching discrete
                     topics into preparing the students for employability as digital researchers
                     either as individuals or as part of a group. The 2018/19 programme focused
                     therefore on guiding the students through the development of their own research
                     project, providing workshops on the following interdisciplinary skills:
                  
                     Data cleaning and management
                     Introduction to Python
                     Network Analysis
                     Information Visualisation
                  
                  Each workshop included a taught element, presented by a subject specialist, and
                     a practical afternoon session, where students applied what they had learnt to
                     their individual projects and data. This hands-on session enabled students to
                     ask and receive advice from the AHDA team, who were also available outside of
                     the workshops through virtual office hours. The diversity of the student cohort
                     resulted in all students being able to make contributions to the discussions
                     and exercises on the basis of their disciplinary and personal background, such
                     as having experience of working in cultural institutions, being skilled in a
                     programming language, or being familiar with certain media types.
               
               
                  Mid-project residential
                  Another residential event was organised midway through the AHDA programme,
                     usually in early March. Students and the AHDA team met for two days to 
                  
                     report on project progress in 10-minute individual or group
                        presentations
                     receive feedback and feed forward advice from instructors and
                        peers
                     develop transferable skills in web authoring and dissemination 
                  
                  The mid-project residential allowed students from different institutions to
                     meet face-to-face and to reflect on the progress of their group project,
                     receiving further feedback from teachers and peers. After the shift to
                     individual projects, the focus of this second residential moved to short
                     presentations on ongoing progress and challenges, and on the provision of
                        feed forward advice, helping the students to
                     plan the next steps in their research . For both
                     group and individual projects, the second residential had the aim of increasing
                     the opportunities for cohort-building and collegiality among students and
                     teachers. It also helped to reinforce important employability skills, such as
                     communication (through presentations on the progress of their project),
                     critical thinking (by providing feed forward on other students’ work)
                     and problem solving (by sharing suggestions for development with the other
                     students). Finally, it provided additional opportunities for reflection and
                     evaluation.
               
               
                  Final presentation
                  The concluding learning event took place in late April and consisted of
                     presentations on the group (or individual) projects, discussions on the
                     projects and an extended feedback session where students expressed their views
                     on the entire AHDA programme. Sample group projects included mapping medieval
                     miracles, visualising Early Modern printing networks and building a survey and
                     database of favourite songs. Individual projects included performing text
                     analysis on mailing lists and forums, classifying music reviews, visualising
                     the social networks behind a museum collection, analysing the language of
                     newspaper articles and of official reports, and building a language corpus. 
                  In the student presentations and discussion, emphasis was placed on process and
                     reflection, rather than on notions of success and completion.
                     Reconnecting to the threshold concepts session at the Winter School, students
                     were asked to reflect on their research journey, highlighting both milestones
                     and difficulties. The importance of careful project planning, of documenting
                     each step of the research process, and of a clear division of tasks within a
                     team were among the most frequent items to emerge from this reflection phase.
                     Students were also encouraged to consider the applicability of what they had
                     learned within their doctoral research and their envisaged future employment
                     opportunities. Several students, for example, declared the intention to include
                     their AHDA project as part of seminar presentations, articles and
                     dissertations, or to further their participation in the digital humanities
                     community through, for example, further involvement in DH initiatives such as
                     summer schools or DH seminars and centres in their home institutions. 
                  The AHDA feedback sessions provided the team with essential information to
                     develop and adjust the programme over the years in order to better understand
                     the training needs of the students and respond to them. For example, the shift
                     from group to individual projects was motivated by consistent student feedback,
                     which highlighted the shortcomings of the group approach. Collaboration is a
                     central tenet of digital humanities, which is often manifested in
                     multi-disciplinary project teams and programmes. However, the constraints of
                     the AHDA programme made effective groupwork difficult. Students were based in
                     different institutions, often separated by significant geographical distances.
                     Moreover, they were often at different points in their doctoral student
                     journeys, ranging from first year to thesis submission. Hence, the other
                     demands on their time varied considerably. Finally, they had different levels
                     of commitment to the projects, especially where the fit with their disciplinary
                     background was poorer, and different degrees of participation in the digital
                     humanities community. 
                  In order to recognise this diversity within the student cohort, the AHDA team
                     agreed therefore to move to individual projects, refocusing the group work
                     objective through the feed forward and feedback sessions in the
                     mid-project and final workshops. The team were impressed by the students’
                     development of informal support networks, for example through a WhatsApp group,
                     and their engagement in independent exchanges of expertise, resources and
                     advice. The vast majority of the goals of the previous group projects were
                     therefore fulfilled through a self-determined asynchronous contact
                     strategy.
               
            
         

            Conclusion: Evaluating the DEAR Model in AHDA
            This article has used the CHASE AHDA programme as a case study to consider how DH
               training might be embedded within a student’s broader learning journey. We have
               analysed the roles of self-determined learning within DH communities of practice, and
               defined digital humanities pedagogy in the context of postgraduate researcher
               training. Based on this critical framework, we have introduced the DEAR model for DH
               learning and teaching, based on four abstracted principles that can be adapted to
               account for locally informed pedagogical practice: Diversity; Employability;
               Application; and Reflection. Finally, we have evaluated how we have instantiated the
               DEAR model into the CHASE AHDA training programme. This conclusion provides a set of
               reflections upon the extent to which DEAR has been successfully implemented in our
               programme, and recommends key priorities for those looking to adopt it in their own
               pedagogical practices. In doing so, it demonstrates the potential for DEAR to act as
               an adaptable framework upon which to shape local multidisciplinary training in
               digital humanities.
            
               Diversity
               The AHDA programme has certainly embraced the diversity of its candidates,
                  originally in attempting to address the disciplinary interests through historical
                  and literary texts, social media, social and economic data and visual and aural
                  media. Although this may reflect the disciplinary demographics of postgraduate
                  research in DTPs such as CHASE, it proved difficult to anticipate each year, and
                  therefore more challenging to cover with our teaching staff.
               In terms of diversity in skills and competencies, AHDA has been able to establish
                  an entry-level approach, which has clearly benefited the majority of postgraduate
                  researchers in being accessible. This was, however, more problematic for students
                  working on group projects. In these cases, students with pre-existing knowledge
                  and higher proficiency in certain methods or techniques were more likely to adopt
                  technical roles within their groups. This limited the opportunities for other
                  members to develop comparable skills.
               Diversity has much deeper historical, social and political implications. Digital
                  Humanities as a community of practice may be inclusive in aims, but clearly can do
                  more to decolonise its curriculum, as shown through the work of groups such as
                  Postcolonial DH and Global Outlook::Digital Humanities.
                     Postcolonial Digital Humanities
                     http://dhpoco.org/; Global Outlook::Digital Humanities 
                     http://www.globaloutlookdh.org/
                   Possible avenues include addressing the gaps in the digital archives,
                  using digital methods to represent marginalised voices, embracing plurality and
                  using the digital to question dominant narratives . The
                  CHASE DTP overall is addressing diversity issues through, for example, the BAME
                  Masterclass series
                     https://www.chase.ac.uk/bame-masterclass
                  , the Feminist Duration Feminist Duration https://www.chase.ac.uk/events/2019/11/1/feminist-duration-joan-anim-addo-activist-mothers-maybe-sisters-surely
                   lecture series, the CHASE Feminist Network
                     https://chasefeministnetwork.wordpress.com/call-for-sessions/
                   and public lectures such as Decolonising the Nuclear.
                     https://www.chase.ac.uk/events/2019/10/22/decolonising-the-nuclearpublic-lecture-amp-workshop
                   A specifically feminist approach to Digital Humanities was introduced with
                  the 2020 FACT///.coding workshop series, which partnered with Women Who Code
                  London and the Reanimating Data Project.
                     https://www.chase.ac.uk/events/2020/2/7/factcoding-amp-reanimnating-data
                  
               
               Writing this in an ongoing pandemic, the question of remote attendance is at the
                  forefront of everyone’s mind, but virtual or mixed seminars are a possibility for
                  widening participation regardless of wider issues. They offer the opportunity to
                  support diverse student needs, such as those who have personal or professional
                  commitments that prevent them from taking part in residential programmes. This
                  approach would have to be combined with a reevaluation of the programme’s goals
                  and structure.
            
            
               Employability
               Many candidates on the AHDA programme were motivated by their own projects, i.e.
                  the PhD itself. The initial focus on group projects was intended to reflect the
                  collaborative nature of work in digital humanities, but this was not limited to
                  preparedness for an academic career. The involvement of key partners from the UK
                  GLAM sector was both a DTP strategic commitment, but also in recognition of the
                  various career trajectories of doctoral candidates.
               Where engagement with employability has been most successful is undoubtedly when
                  representatives of the GLAM sector and project managers have been involved. These
                  contributors have repeatedly highlighted the importance of institutional
                  responsibilities, such as risk management, openness and scalability. Although
                  candidates could use the AHDA experience as evidence of working with institutions
                  beyond their immediate academic community, our programme did not focus on
                  CV-building itself. We have also yet to measure the impact of AHDA on
                  employability longer term. This would require a survey of the AHDA alumni to see
                  if the training helped them in their careers, where opportunities in the academic
                  community are still discipline-oriented. This in turn is heavily dependent on
                  structural factors, such as the short-term funding provided by the DTP.
                  Employability, therefore, is not the sole responsibility of this training, but
                  needs to be part of broader initiatives in the UK addressing mentoring, skills and
                  career diversity. One way forward may be the public scholarship model proposed by
                     Cassuto and Weisbuch (2021), which involves
                  academic knowledge and digital literacies, but also the professional attributes
                  that are frequently deployed - but often implicit - in the GLAM sector . The question of employability is an ongoing debate in
                  DH , for which programmes such as AHDA provide
                  important context.
            
            
               Application
               The heutagogical ethos of the AHDA programme meant that students needed to take
                  individual responsibility for the design, execution and evaluation of a project.
                  In group projects, although the first process involved investment from most group
                  members, the remaining processes depended heavily on a group’s dynamic and its
                  diversity.
               Consistent motivation and evidencing of learning through design, execution and
                  evaluation can be better defined and observed through individual projects. Their
                  final stage is clearly complemented by an anonymous feed-forward approach, which
                  allows for peer-learning in the absence of a team-based approach. 
               Application is therefore observed in two ways. The first is in furthering a
                  student’s PhD research, the second is in making a wider contribution to knowledge,
                  for example through partnerships with cultural heritage organisations, such as the
                  British Library, or broadcast media. This is broadly in line with DTP support for
                  partnerships and placements with CHASE partner institutions.See https://www.chase.ac.uk/research-placements
                   Ultimately, this involves a movement from what both Nowviskie and Warwick
                  describe as the unhelpful construct of hack versus yack, and towards
                  a praxis-based model of digital humanities in theory and practice 
                  . 
            
            
               Reflection
               A reflective approach to learning in the AHDA programme has been key to enabling
                  the three other core elements of the DEAR model. A recognition of the challenges
                  of the learning curve at the outset, and the need to effectively self-assess
                  current skills and knowledge, has been crucial for addressing individual
                  motivations and outcomes for both the project and for learning itself. In its most
                  recent iteration, AHDA candidates’ mid-project and final presentations clearly
                  demonstrated the technical skills acquired and extended abstract thinking . Specifically, the projects displayed the conceptual
                  alignment of the ontological, methodological and epistemological dimensions of a
                  research project; key characteristics of doctoral candidates .
               Within the DEAR model, such reflection should take into account the other
                  components of diversity, employability and application as encompassed within the
                  students’ own learning journey. For example, the AHDA programme’s final reflective
                  session is delivered as a group, which allows the diverse perspectives of
                  attendees to feed in, while students are also tasked with addressing the
                  development and learning outcomes of their project work, thus linking their
                  reflection back to the application of digital humanities theory in practice. The
                  iterative approach to reflection adopted in our programme (feed-forward and
                  feedback) for students’ presentations also addressed the ways in which individuals
                  identify their next steps, both for development of their own skills set and
                  realisation of their project(s). These are fundamental aspects of professional
                  development and employability generally, relating back to the RDF sub-domains B3
                  and C2 (see Figure 3).
            
            
               Recommendations for Practice
               This article has conceptualised and applied the DEAR model within the context of
                  the UK, demonstrating its success in developing a community of practice conducive
                  to heutagogical learning within an advanced research training programme. However,
                  the model has applicability for other contexts where a highly reflective,
                  self-directed style of learning is suited locally to student needs, including
                  doctoral training programmes internationally. The DEAR approach allows students
                  the time and space to situate digital humanities within their own broader research
                  skills development. As such, we see this as complementary to existing summer and
                  winter schools, which are more focused upon skills development over a compressed
                  time frame. Although we have cited examples of the projects that participants in
                  AHDA have undertaken over the years, this study does not advocate adopting a
                  predefined programme structure. It is the core elements of the DEAR model that are
                  crucial to its success, such as providing time and space within the programme for
                  the heutagogical aspects to be prioritised. Programme design should build out from
                  these core principles, rather than inserting them once a programme is confirmed.
                  For this reason, while team-taught models of DH training, including AHDA, may well
                  use reflection, each of the instructors can benefit from building it in as an
                  explicit value at the design stage.
               As a result of running AHDA for several years, we recommend that those
                  implementing the DEAR model pay particular attention to the following points: 
               
                  Focus on participant projects and individual motivations, in order to
                     scaffold learning and increase engagement with reflective components of the
                     programme. This could be achieved through small group presentations about
                     individual learning aims and, resources allowing, alternative pathways through
                     the programme.
                  Encourage peer support for the learning around the project, rather than the
                     execution of the project, using group feed-forward and feedback opportunities.
                     For example, students can be encouraged to adopt communication platforms that
                     best suit them, such as WhatsApp, which create a self-moderated back channel
                     that facilitates heutagogical learning outcomes. 
                  Ensure diversity of voices among trainers and support students in developing
                     core knowledge around the nature of data and project management. One approach
                     could be to involve individuals with expertise in project management and
                     interdisciplinary collaboration, such as library, Alt-Ac and industry
                     professionals in roles allied to digital humanities research and
                     infrastructure. 
                  Aim for inclusivity by providing recordings of workshops and preparatory
                     reading materials and exercises. Organisers may want to use a project blog for
                     public outputs or draw on existing local technical resources, such as a virtual
                     learning environment (VLE), where materials cannot be made public. Online
                     learning may also lower financial overheads, but may come with a potential
                     trade-off in cohort development that comes with in-person learning. 
                  The DEAR principles encourage trainers to develop learning environments that
                     support active learning. This might require additional time commitment within
                     the programme; if a course requires six hours of taught sessions, then an
                     additional hour would allow for reflection on learning or application, for
                     instance.
               
               It should be considered that our implementation of the DEAR model was a
                  non-credit-bearing programme, and relied on students and staff meeting several
                  times over a period of four months. Residential programmes carry significant
                  financial overheads, but in our case CHASE invested extensively in AHDA through
                  the Training and Development fund, which may not be true of all programmes. One
                  consideration for instructors is whether the programme is credit-bearing, a core
                  requirement or extracurricular, which has implications for the availability of
                  financial and administrative support. Scalability is also an issue, as we would
                  argue that such an approach inevitably limits the number of participants. As
                  organisers, we felt that a maximum of twenty to twenty-five students allowed for
                  effective delivery of the programme aims and objectives.
               If the resources for delivering a full training programme are unavailable, the
                  DEAR model has value as a diagnostic, self-assessment tool in terms of learning
                  design, which can be deployed for instructors who might be building separate
                  course modules in a short programme or by postgraduate researchers and PhD
                  students who need to scaffold their own self-determined learning in DH.
                  Furthermore, it has potential to become a modular, adaptable framework whereby the
                  four components are remixed to fit local learning priorities. In this sense it
                  operates at both the level of the individual and the higher education
                  institution.
               Taking into account our findings, we argue that the DEAR model has great value for
                  trainers working in a context where digital humanities skills are required.
                  However to date the DEAR model has only been implemented within CHASE AHDA. We
                  encourage other digital humanities instructors to adopt and adapt the DEAR model
                  to their own educational contexts in order to test its application as a means of
                  framing learning and teaching design within diverse digital humanities
                  communities.
            
         
