Title:  Towards a differentiated digital-hermeneutic
          analysis tool for the detection of short quotations using the example of the Church Father Jerome
Volume:  018
Issue:  3
Date:  5 August 2024
Abstract:  
        
        Late Latin literature is characterized by numerous references to classical texts and authors. For Jerome of
          Stridon in particular, manual-hermeneutic research has revealed various intertextuality phenomena usually published
          in encyclopaedic collections of quotations. In this paper, we present a digital-hermeneutic analysis toolkit
          primarily designed to detect short text-text congruencies that have a high chance of being evaluated
          as an intentional quotation. We favour a mixed-methods approach, which is based on findings from manual-hermeneutic
          research. Our aim is to focus on Jerome's citation technique: Based on hermeneutic analysis of confirmed
          quotations, we formulate differentiated criteria that lead to a deeper understanding of the phenomenon of quoting
          and thus also have the potential to optimize our toolkit.
      
Full Body Text: 

        
        A central goal of the DFG project Quoting as a narrative strategy: A digital-hermeneutic
          analysis of intertextual phenomena using the example of the letters of Church Father JeromeFunded by
          the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation), project no. 382880410. is to develop
          and establish a differentiated classification system for the analysis of quotations and allusions that sheds more
          light on quoting as a discursive-narrative strategy and enables a deeper understanding of the cultural
          hybridization processes of Christian Late Antiquity. The epistolary corpus of the biblical scholar Jerome is at the
          center of this investigation because it is particularly characterized by references to (very often pagan)
          pre-texts. Cf., for example: , , , , , , , , , and . A synopsis of Jerome’s own statements on the Christian use of classical literature are
          collected by Mohr (2007).
        A methodological focus of the study lies first, on the critical discussion of the consequences of using digital
          matching processes for citation detection and the understanding of citations in general and second, on the
          (further) development and optimization of automated detection procedures themselves. Particular attention is paid
          to the transparency of the applied filtering processes since only this guarantees insightful links to hermeneutic
          intertextuality analyses. Moreover, procedures are to be developed that can be applied universally to any text (of
          Latin literature).
        This paper presents the results of considerations relating to citation theory, which support the development of a
          highly precise digital-hermeneutic analysis toolkit for short citations.On the term
          short citation, which is used throughout the paper, see Section
          IV. Firstly, the digital analysis process is discussed with regard to its links to
          manual-hermeneutic research as well as relevant contexts within the field of digital humanities. After establishing
          the necessary terminology, corpus requirements, and principles of optimization, the steps and procedures of the
          digital-hermeneutic analysis toolkit are introduced. Lastly, we formulate differentiated criteria based on
          hermeneutic analysis of confirmed short quotations that lead to a deeper understanding of the
          phenomenon of quoting and thus also have the potential to optimize our toolkit.
      

        I. Classification of the digital analysis process
        Manual-hermeneutic approaches of Quellenforschung and intertextuality research have predominantly
          revealed longer text-text congruencies and clearly marked allusions, which — due to the high degree of
          congruency — can usually unambiguously be evaluated as quotations. Additionally, the digitally supported
          investigation process, which is also capable of holistically detecting two-word loci similes in
          particular, increasingly brings to light parallels that consist of only a small amount of shared word material and
          can therefore, for the time being, only be classified as potential quotations.Analytical approaches to the
          digital detection of intertextuality phenomena have been presented by Bamman and Crane (2008), Hohl Trillini and Quassdorf (2010), and Schubert and Heyer (2010) with the Citationgraph of the eAqua project, Büchler et al. (2014) with the Tracer of the eTrap project, and Manca et al. (2011) within the project Musisque Deoque. The approach of Coffee et al. (2013),
          which focuses on two-word loci similes, pursues, within the Tesserae
          project, an operationalization approach specifically pertaining to classical philology ,
          , . However, problems arise in the concrete
          application of the filter settings (lack of transferability of once calibrated settings, lack of explicability and
          transparency of the selection and insufficient adjustment possibilities), so that this project environment is not
          used for the development of a differentiated classification system of citations.
        The first digital-hermeneutic mixed-methods approach to treat these matches analytically was presented by Revellio
          (2022). Designed for the detection of (previously undetected) Aeneid citations and allusions, it also analyses Jerome’s citation practice in more
          detail.
        Revellio’s study thus sheds light inter alia on the outer limits of quoting as a
          phenomenon and discusses the question of to what extent and under what conditions textual coincidences of only two
          identical words can at all be declared a quotation. In contrast to unambiguous quotations consisting of a few words
          or half, full, and multiple-verse quotations, these two-word syntagms represent a special category of textual
          correspondences. Here, rather weak citation signals play a role and are still to be determined in more detail. To
          evaluate the citation potency of these new short congruencies, Revellio created a citation typology
          , incorporating into her proposed categorization
          morphological, syntactic, lexical, idiomatic, and phraseological justifications.
        However, these (hermeneutic) analyses and classification processes are only practicable for a moderate number of
          computer-generated matches. For a universal detection procedure of citations, which is applicable also to larger
          corpora, an even more sophisticated (pre-)selection of actual citations from the pool of found matches is
          mandatory. This goal shall now be achieved through the development of adequate filtering procedures and the
          implementation of a calibrated detection and classification process comprising several phases.
      

        II. Principles, preconditions, and definitions
        
          Corpus requirements
          One advantage of the detection method presented here is its universal applicability.The present project,
            unlike Tesserae, does not rely on pre-existing corpora. At the same time this
            circumstance ensures that the criteria arising from the demands for transparency in the filtering process are
            satisfied (see Section I, n. 4). In principle, any (Latin) text can be used
            as an input, as long as it is available as an appropriately prepared .txt file.
            However, this also means that accessibility to electronic full texts is essential for the compilation of specific
            research corpora.Although, in theory, the Copyright Act attempts to enable precisely this with regulations
            on text and data mining for the purposes of scientific research, in practice — in our experience — negotiations
            remain necessary. That said, at the present time, the acquisition of the required digital texts is not
            always easy and even structurally problematic.
          The databases accessible without license agreements usually offer the text of older editions, which does not
            always reflect current research. The quality of the texts usually required in the discipline is more likely to be
            ensured in the case of licensed databases since these offer more up-to-date editions. Here, however,
            time-consuming and (in some cases) cost-intensive coordination and negotiation processes with rights holders
            associated with various institutes are necessary. In addition — both in the case of license-free and in the case
            of licensed texts — the accompanying information from critical apparatus is (mostly) missing.
          For the current project, the required classical texts of current editions (without critical apparatus) were
            procured on the one hand through an adaptation of an already existing database license, on the other hand through
            renegotiating a license for the specific use case with regards to methods of text-data-mining.In the first
            case, the texts of the relevant classical authors were made available directly by the publisher without further
            negotiations within the framework of an existing license. In the second case, the situation was more difficult
            because the question of which institution holds the rights to the electronic (!) texts remained unclear until the
            end, even for the publishers involved. In addition, the cost of making the texts available within the existing
            license offer was estimated to be very high, which made negotiations about the cost framework
            necessary.
          From a science perspective, however, the use of licensed text editions structurally prevents the transparency
            and reproducibility of the digital analysis processes actually envisaged by the project. After all, in order to
            keep the citation analysis processes replicable, the texts used should also be allowed to be disclosed.The
            copyright exceptions for text-mining methods (especially for research purposes) are limited by regulations
            surrounding the publication of the texts within the context of research results.
          All texts provided by the publishers had to be converted into a uniform format for entry into the algorithmic
            processing. This was done using custom Python code to transform and (re)organize all
            the required paratextual information from the XML and .txt
            formats into the final .txt file formats used.For this step in particular, it
            would be important for publishers to provide texts in a systematic and consistent manner in order to avoid
            time-consuming adaptation processes for singular and divergent text formats. The described detection
            process is based on the Python programming language in version 3.8.The individual
            analysis steps, so far, are stored in individual scripts. The aim is to combine the scripts into a
            pipeline, not least for the sake of user-friendliness. It is our intention to publish the code base
            on the GitHub development platform.
        
        
          Terminology
          The concept of quoting is based on the lexical understanding of citations as it is applied within the existing
            research tradition (i.e., the ancient concept of loci similes). The entire filtering process is thus
            fundamentally based on finding shared words in Jerome’s corpus of letters as the target text on the
            one hand and in the works of Virgil, Cicero, and other classical authors as source texts on the other. According
            to the loci similes concept, shared words are identical word forms in a certain
            number.Thus, the citation pair Verg. ecl. 4,60–61
            (Incipe, parue puer, risu cognoscere
            matrem: / matri longa decem tulerunt fastidia
            menses – Begin, baby boy, to recognize your mother with a smile: ten months have brought your mother
            long travail; all translations for Virgil’s works are taken from Fairclough’s two-volume Loeb Classical Library edition revised by Goold, 1999–2000) and Hier.
            epist. 130,16,3 (putasne, frustra infans paruulus et qui
            uix matrem risu et uultus hilaritate cognoscat, qui nec boni aliquid fecit nec mali,
            daemone corripitur, morbo opprimitur regio et ea sustinet, quae uidemus inpios homines non sustinere et sustinere
            deo seruientes? – Do you think a very young child, one who barely recognizes its mother by her
            laughter and her face by her joy, who has done neither good nor bad, is seized by the devil for no reason, or
            prostrated by jaundice, or endures such things for no reason, which we see godless people do not suffer, but
            those who serve God do?; all translations for Jerome’s letters are by the authors) contains exactly two
            shared words (risu – risu; matrem – matrem). Other similar word forms such as declined, conjugated, and
            derived forms of the same lemma (matri – matrem; cognoscere – cognoscat; parue – paruulus) as well as synonyms (puer – infans) although particularly relevant for the hermeneutical reading process, initially are undetected in
            the digital detection process.
          The starting point of the calibration of the analytical toolkit is the so-called gold standard of citations
            collected in (manual-hermeneutic) research.Cf. on the establishing of optimization rules: . Potential new quotations are thus those found matches that emerge
            as additional findings (total findings minus the gold standard contained therein) from the computer-assisted
            detection process. From these, the actual new quotations are ultimately selected or confirmed by means of
            hermeneutic close reading.
          In order to be able to perform the final evaluation (and classification), the digital preselection — by means of
            the filters we discuss below — has to be optimized in such a way that the number of false found matches is
            kept as low as possible.
        
      

        III. The (digital) detection process
        
          Schematic representation of the digital analysis process
          
          a branching chart detailing the use case of each filter
        
        
          Step 0: Preparing the texts
          The texts, in the form of .txt files, are subdivided by chapters (for prose) or by
            verses (for poetry). It is important to emphasize that the analysis process can be carried out with any source
            text.On the universal applicability of the detection processes, see Corpus
            requirements, n. 5.
        
        
          Step 1: Separation of sentences und text comparison through Simillima
          These raw texts are examined for two-word congruences by means of the script-based tool Simillima. These are pairs in which both the source text and the target text contain at
            least two (distinct) words in exactly the same word form.In this routine, the matching process with Simillima replaces Tesserae in its basic function of text
            comparison, . Nevertheless, the process is structurally clearly comparable
            to Tesserae. The actual comparison of texts is based, in essence, on a
            matching of certain units of target and source text: each unit of Jerome’s corpus of letters, for example,
            is compared with each unit of the Eclogae. The whole sentence is taken as the
            matching unit. During the algorithmic procedure the end of a sentence is indicated by a period, question
            mark, and exclamation mark. Of course, the modern punctuation is not an unproblematic criterion, whose employment
            and effects on the results of the study must always be reflected; . Separation of sentences is also performed when a colon and quotation marks are combined, i.e., at the
            beginning of quoted speech. If, on the other hand, a period, question mark, or exclamation mark occur within a
            parenthesis (marked, for example, by brackets), separation of sentences is suppressed in order to keep the
            parenthesis and the surrounding sentence together as one unit. However, insertions marked by dashes can only be
            addressed programmatically in a few cases, because dashes can also occur individually (whereas brackets always
            occur in pairs). Therefore, the separation of sentences is not suppressed for an insertion marked by dashes with
            a period, question mark, or exclamation mark. This can be considered unproblematic, since insertions with such
            punctuation marks are usually long and it is therefore unlikely that quote-constituting split word material can
            be found around this insertion (distance criterion). Sentences of direct speech which are interrupted by
            speech-introducing words such as inquit, ait, dixit, or dicit are also held together. The fact that only the most
            common speech introductions can be considered here is negligible, because it is rather unlikely that a quotation
            within a literal speech is interrupted (if at all) by an insertion other than these standardized variants.
            Additionally, in order to improve the algorithm, periods as part of abbreviations should be treated as exceptions
            during the separation of sentences. These exceptions have so far not been implemented, as Georgics, Eclogues, Aeneid and Jerome’s
            letters do not contain any abbreviations. Naturally, with a view to other corpora (e.g., Cicero), this is
            necessary and proposed. Moreover, the sentence-tokenization feature of the Classical
            Language Toolkit (CLTK) is currently being tested as an alternative. The output file of the Simillima program contains for each pair a match number, the actual text reference,In
            the case of poetry, the line in which a sentence begins is taken as the text reference. the
            respective texts (the shared words being highlighted), and finally the shared words
            themselves.
        
        
          Step 2: Applying the Complura filter
          The Complura filter returns matches whose shared word material consists of at least
            four consecutive shared words. The pairs found in this way are at the same time already final
            (albeit partial) results: due to the accumulation of shared words, they are unambiguous quotations
            that do not require further automated analysis.On this filter approach, . By focusing on the number of consecutive shared words and disregarding their actual
            order, which may be different in the target and source text, there are indeed false (i.e., irrelevant) matches,
            but only in small numbers. For the Georgica, Eclogae
            and Aeneid, for example, the Complura filter yields 76
            correctly identified matches and only five false matches, which can be rejected at first glance with
            little manual effort. Especially in the case of clustered synsemantic words (grammatical words such as
            conjunctions, subjunctions, prepositions, pronouns, auxiliary verbs) such citations would also not be detectable
            in the further digital analysis process.This is due to the removal of stopwords, see Step 3. An example of this phenomenon is a quotation of Virgil in Jerome’s letter 52, which has
            been identified by traditional scholars:
          
            Citations with clustered synsemantic words (non and omnis) would be excluded without the Complura Filter. In this example,
              non, omnia, possumus, and
              omnes are highlighted in both texts.
            
              Verg. ecl. 8,57–63
              Hier. epist. 52,9,3
            
            
               incipe Maenalios mecum, mea tibia, uersus. / omnia uel medium fiat mare. uiuite siluae: /
                praeceps aërii specula de montis in undas / deferar; extremum hoc munus morientis habeto. / desine Maenalios,
                iam desine, tibia, uersus. / Haec Damon; uos, quae responderit Alphesiboeus, / dicite, Pierides: non omnia possumus omnes.
               sed et genus adrogantiae est clementiorem te uideri uelle, quam pontifex Christi est. non omnia possumus omnes. alius in ecclesia oculus est, alius lingua, alius
                manus, alius pes, alius auris, uenter et cetera. lege Pauli ad Corinthios: diuersa membra unum corpus
                efficiunt. nec rusticus et tantum simplex frater ideo se sanctum putet, si nihil nouerit, nec peritus et
                eloquens in lingua aestimet sanctitatem. multoque melius est e duobus inperfectis rusticitatem sanctam habere
                quam eloquentiam peccatricem.
            
            
              Begin with me, my flute, a song of Maenalus! Nay, let all become mid-ocean! Farewell, ye woods! Headlong
                from some towering mountain peak I will throw myself into the waves; take this as my last dying gift! Cease,
                my flute, now cease the song of Maenalus!” Thus Damon. Tell, Pierian maids, the answer of Alphesiboeus; we
                cannot all do everything. All translations for Virgil’s works are taken from Fairclough’s two-volume
                Loeb Classical Library edition revised by Goold,
                1999–2000).
              But it is also a kind of arrogance to want to appear more charitable than Christ's bishop is. Not all of
                us can do everything. In the Church, one is the eye, another the tongue, a third the hand, still another the
                foot, another the ears, the stomach, and so on. Read in Paul's letter to the Corinthians: the various members
                form one body. An uneducated and quite plain brother, if he knows nothing, should not therefore consider
                himself holy, and neither should an educated and eloquent brother measure his holiness by eloquence. But of
                the two imperfect kinds, holy modesty is far better than sinful eloquence.All translations for Jerome’s
                letters are by the authors. 
            
          
          The shared words here mainly consist of stopwords that are already present at the very beginning of
            a Virgil-Epistulae-specific stoplist, with the exception of possumus.On
            stoplists, see Step 3. Therefore, without passing through the Complura filter routine, this well-known quotation would be sorted out as the analysis
            proceeds.
        
        
          Step 3: Applying filters based on semantic and distance criteria
          Since after the first matching process the number of pairs of sentences is clearly too high for the phase of
            close reading (for example, the matching of the corpus of Jerome’s letters with the Eclogae yields 408,393 results, that with the Georgica 1,217,441 results,
            and that with the Aeneid 4,525,752 results), filtering criteria of semantic quality
            and distance are applied, as already in Revellio (2022).On the deduction of these criteria and discussion
            thereof, . First, synsemantic words that are usually not
            sufficient for proving a text–text relationship (i.e. a quotation) are removed with the help of
            stoplists.On the application of such stoplists, . In addition to
            the standard list of the Perseus project, seven corpus-based stoplists consisting of
            the most frequent words are used. Despite the combination of Virgil’s three works with Jerome’s Epistulae, the stoplists show a strong dominance of Jeromean word material with respect to
            the autosemantics contained by the most-frequent-words approach. For example, in the first stoplist containing
            the words occurring at least 250 times, the word Christi (445 times) appears more
            frequently than many synsemantics such as quoque (too, 441 times) or
            tu (you, 433 times). For comparison, the word Aeneas only appears in the list of words that occur at least 150 times. Approaches of a differentiated
            weighting of the two texts or of taking into account the frequency of a word within the text (cf. Zou et al.,
            2006) by way of which such disproportions could be corrected have been considered here but could not yet be
            implemented. If two shared words are still contained, their distance is calculated. Then, if
            a maximum of two words are found between them, the matched pair is kept and written into the output
            file.The distance of 2 was preferred to the distance of 3 based on previous observations . On the implementation, see .
          After processing this step the algorithm outputs several result lists (one for each stoplist). One goal in the
            development of the detection process is to determine the one stoplist for which the highest possible number of
            actual quotations can be found among returned matches, but for which, at the same time, the surplus is as small
            as possible.So far, for Virgil’s Eclogae, Georgica, and Aeneid, stoplist 6, which contains words with more than 100
            occurrences in the Eclogae, Georgica, Aeneid, and Jerome’s Epistulae, has turned out to be optimal
            in this regard. The number of potential new quotations remains comparatively high after this step: for the
            three mentioned works of Virgil alone, the selection of stoplist 6 (at least 100 occurrences) results in 862
            pairs for review. Although the number of potential new quotations can thus be decimated compared to the first
            matching process, the algorithm proves to be deficient at this stage — especially in view of significantly larger
            text corpora such as those of late-antique authors.
        
        
          Step 4: Applying the Auctoritas filter
          The Auctoritas filter bundles these potential new findings that are clearly
            recognizable as intentional citations by explicit reference to authors, works, and the like. Thus, for instance,
            the phrase sceleratum frigus (the villainous cold) in Jerome’s letter 121 is
            explicitly marked as a citation because the name Uergilius is mentioned and because
            there is actually a citation marker in the form of the predicate appellet
            (calls):
          
            Identification of intentional citations through explicit references with the Auctoritas filter, here by the mention of Uergilius and the citation marker
              appellet in Jerome. In this example, sceleratum and frigus are highlighted in both texts. Additionally, Uergilius,
              alter Homerus apud nos, and appellet are underlined in
              the text from Jerome.
            
              Verg. georg. 2,248–258
              Hier. epist. 121,10,5
            
            
               pinguis item quae sit tellus, hoc denique pacto / discimus: haud unquam manibus iactata
                fatiscit, / sed picis in morem ad digitos lentescit habendo. / umida maiores herbas alit, ipsaque iusto /
                laetior. a, nimium ne sit mihi fertilis illa, / nec se praeualidam primis ostendat aristis! / quae grauis
                est, ipso tacitam se pondere prodit, / quaeque leuis. promptum est oculis praediscere nigram, / et quis cui
                color. at sceleratum exquirere frigus / difficile est: piceae tantum taxique nocentes /
                interdum aut hederae pandunt uestigia nigrae.
               nec hoc miremur in apostolo, si utatur eius linguae consuetudine, in qua natus est et
                nutritus, cum Uergilius, alter Homerus apud nos,
                patriae suae sequens consuetudinem ‘sceleratum’ frigus appellet. nemo ergo uos
                superet atque deuincat uolens humilitatem litterae sequi et angelorum religionem atque culturam, ut non
                seruiatis spiritali intellegentiae, sed exemplaribus futurorum, quae nec ipse uidit, qui uos superare
                desiderat, siue uidet — utrumque enim habetur in Graeco — ,praesertim cum tumens ambulet et incedat inflatus
                mentisque superbiam et gestu corporis praeferat — hoc enim significat ἐμβατεύων — ,frustra autem infletur et tumeat sensu carnis suae carnaliter cuncta intellegens et
                traditionum Iudaicarum deliramenta perquirens et non tenens caput omnium scripturarum illud, de quo dictum
                est: caput uiri Christus est, caput autem atque principium totius corporis eorumque, qui credunt, et omnis
                intellegentiae spiritalis.
            
            
              Again, richness of soil we learn in this way only: never does it crumble when worked in the hands, but
                like pitch grows sticky in the fingers when held. A moist soil rears taller grass and is of itself unduly
                prolific. Ah! not mine be that over-fruitful soil, and may it not show itself too strong when the ears are
                young! A heavy soil betrays itself silently by its own weight; so does a light one. It is easy for the eye to
                learn at once a black soil and the hue of any kind. But to detect the villainous cold is hard; only pitch
                pines or baleful yews and black ivy sometimes reveal its traces.
              Let us not be surprised at this in the apostle, that he uses his accustomed language, with which he was
                born and brought up, since Virgil, our second Homer, following the custom of his homeland, calls the cold
                ‘criminal’. Let no one, then, surpass you and prevail over you who wants to follow the simplicity of
                Scripture and the worship and adoration of angels, even if you do not serve the spiritual knowledge, but as
                examples for future times, which the one who wants to despise you has neither seen nor sees himself — for
                both translations are valid according to the Greek text — especially since he proudly parades around, comes
                along puffed up, and carries haughtiness before him in spirit and posture — for this is what ἐμβατεύων means — for in vain does he puff himself up and boast, when with the sense
                of his flesh he understands all things carnally, and investigates the silliness of Jewish traditions, and
                does not hold to the head of all scriptures, that of which it is written: The head of the man is Christ,
                namely the head and the beginning of the whole body and of those who believe, and the head of all spiritual
                knowledge.
            
          
          For efficiency reasons, the filter is applied after the separation of sentences and text comparison (Simillima).The filter searches the sentences of the target text for authorial
            information (e.g., Uergilius, poeta, Aeneis, etc.) and returns all matches for the respective sentence if a match is found. However, if the
            filter is applied immediately after matching (Simillima), Uergilius alone for Hier. epist. 121,10,5 already
            produces 382 matches with various passages of Virgil, of which, except for Verg. georg. 2,256, all are the result of only two synsemantics such as et or in and cannot be considered as pretexts. Therefore, the
            application after removal of the stoplist of the Perseus project is advisable in
            order to exclude as many as possible, but no author-specific synsemantics. If corpus-based stoplists were
            applied, just quotations, whose words fall under the most frequent words of a certain author, would no longer be
            detectable — even if this author, his work, or the like is mentioned explicitly in the environment.
            Similar to the output of the Complura filter, the result list of the Auctoritas filter contains (partially) final results. These are to be classified as
            quotations due to the explicit reference to the respective source text and therefore do not have to go through
            any further selection processes.
        
        
          Step 5: Applying the Scissa filter 
          The Scissa filter eliminates potential new quotations whose shared words — in at least one
            of the two texts (source or target) — do not belong to one syntactic unit. The indicators for separation of the
            word material are soft punctuation marks (comma, colon, and semicolon).After applying the filter,
            pairs are kept where the split word material is separated by the same number of soft punctuation marks. In
            this case, there could be a longer quotation containing, for instance, a subordinate clause. Since colons,
            commas, and semicolons indicate weaker syntactic separations than periods, question marks, and exclamation
            marks, they are not used in Step 1 to separate sentences, in order to prevent the heavy fragmentation of source
            and target text. Nevertheless, the caesurae marked in this way can — in this phase of more detailed analysis — be
            used as indicators for syntactic separation of quoted material. This is illustrated by a match resulting from the
            matching of Jerome’s letters with Virgil’s Georgics as an example:
          
            The Scissa filter eliminates potential quotations with shared
              words that do not belong to one syntactic unit in either source or target text, here the shared
              words (pluuia and laeta) are syntactically
              separated by commas in Jerome’s letter. In this example, pluuia and laeta are highlighted in both texts. Additionally, et is
              underlined twice on the left and three times on the right.
            
              Verg. georg. 1,322–327
              Hier. epist. 108,28,3
            
            
               saepe etiam immensum caelo uenit agmen aquarum, / et foedam glomerant tempestatem imbribus
                atris / collectae ex alto nubes: ruit arduus aether / et pluuia ingenti sata laeta boumque labores / diluit; implentur fossae et caua flumina
                crescunt / cum sonitu feruetque fretis spirantibus aequor.
               aderant Hierosolymorum et aliarum urbium episcopi et sacerdotum inferioris gradus ac Leuitarum innumerabilis multitudo. omne monasterium
                uirginum et monachorum chori repleuerant. statimque ut audiuit sponsum uocantem: surge, ueni, proxima mea,
                speciosa mea, columba mea, quoniam ecce hiemps pertransiuit, pluuia abiit sibi, laeta respondit:
                flores uisi sunt in terra, tempus sectionis aduenit et: credo uidere bona domini
                in terra uiuentium.
            
            
              Often, too, there appears in the sky a mighty column of waters, and clouds mustered from on high roll up
                a murky tempest of black showers: down falls the lofty heaven, and with its deluge of rain washes away the
                gladsome crops and the labours of oxen. The dykes fill, the deep-channelled rivers swell and roar, and the
                sea steams in its heaving friths.
              Present were the bishops of Jerusalem and of other cities, priests of lower rank, and an innumerable
                multitude of Levites. The whole monastery was filled with crowds of virgins and monks. As soon as she heard
                the bridegroom speak, ‘Arise, come, my beloved, my fair one, my dove, for behold, winter is over, the rains
                have ceased,’ she answered joyfully, ‘Flowers have appeared on the earth, the time of cutting is here,’ and,
                ‘But I believe to behold the kindness of the Lord in the land of the living.’
            
          
          The shared words (pluuia; laeta)With
            et (underlined), the pair contains, strictly speaking, another word shared by both
            texts (two instances in Virgil, three in Jerome). As a frequent word (and synsemantic), however, the conjunction
            does not factor into the evaluation of the quotation (see Step 6). are
            embedded in an asyndetic structure in Jerome: pluuia is the subject of abiit, while laeta characterizes the subject implicitly contained
            in respondit. The fact that these shared words are thus bound to two
            different predicate verbs (which is indicated accordingly by commas in the underlying print edition) rules out a
            citation.The fact that the shared words do not belong together syntactically in Virgil either
            (pluuia ingenti is ablative; sata laeta is the direct
            object of diluit) is irrelevant with regard to the separation of the word material in
            the target text. Having been applied, the Scissa filter reduced the number of potential new
            quotations by 28% for the Eclogues, by 22% for the Georgics and by 30% for the Aeneid.The numbers refer to returned
            matches after stoplist 6 is applied. The filter is currently being tested at an early stage. It also can only be
            applied to potential new quotations that have exactly two shared words after application of the
            stoplists. Beyond an extension of the filter’s general capabilities, there is potential for further optimization
            in two respects. Currently, only an unequal number of punctuation marks between the shared words is
            used as a decisive criterion (i.e., a match is rejected as soon as one of the two texts has more commas than the
            other). In addition, it would also be possible to set a maximum limit for the number of allowed soft
            punctuation marks between the shared words since the plausibility of the finding being an actual
            quotation decreases even with the same high number of intervening soft punctuation marks. Second, there is
            a need to optimize the filter also with respect to cases where one of the two shared words is
            contained more than once in a phrase. For example, when applying the filter to Verg. ecl. 10,52–54 (certum est in siluis inter spelaea ferarum /
            malle pati tenerisque meos incidere amores / arboribus: crescent illae, crescetis, amores – Well I know that in the woods, amid wild
            beasts’ dens, it is better to suffer and carve my love on the young trees. They will grow, and you, my love, will
            grow with them; shared words: meos; amores [2x]) two text segments are examined for their soft punctuation marks: incidere between meos and the first instance of amores as well as incidere amores / arboribus: crescent illae, crescetis,
            between meos and the second instance of amores. This
            results in 0 or 2 commas and 0 or 1 colon. At the moment, this finding is retained as soon as the text of Jerome
            also contains either 0 or 2 commas and either 0 or 1 colon. Thus the find is only eliminated if both combinations
            do not match the text material of Jerome.
        
        
          Step 6: Applying the historical text-reuse grammar (HTRG) filterOn the
            development of the historical text-reuse grammar,  as well as  on the deduction and implementation of the HTRG filter. 
          The HTRG filter developed by Revellio is placed after the Scissa filter:
            Potential findings from computer-assisted text comparison, whose matching word material
            consists of at least two nouns or two verbs as well as a combination of these two word classes, [are]
            particularly suited to establish a meaning-producing text-to-text relationship.Potentielle Funde des computergestützten Textvergleichs, deren übereinstimmendes Wortmaterial der
            Wortartenstruktur nach aus mindestens zwei Nomina oder zwei Verben sowie aus der Kombination dieser beiden
            Wortarten besteht, [sind] besonders prädestiniert dafür, eine sinnproduzierende Text-Text-Beziehung zu
            etablieren. On the discussion of this criterion, . 
          Accordingly, the shared words of each match are analyzed by part-of-speech tagging. Information on
            whether the combination of shared words satisfies the HTRG rule (N–N;
            V–V; N–V; V–N) is added to each match. Thus, this filter does not eliminate matches but increases the
            resolution of the output data. On the implementation of the filter, .
          The steps of the digital analysis tools described so far are already performed in an automated way. In what
            follows, new optimization strategies are presented that are currently in an experimental stage but seem to be
            target-oriented and promising. By implementing these approaches into the routine, the automation process shall be
            extended and the amount of work in the close-reading phase shall thus be made manageable by further reducing the
            number of returned matches.
        
      

        IV. Optimization strategies based on the analysis of published Quotations of Virgil in Jerome
        
          
          Short quotations make up only a small proportion of the total amount of quotations of Virgil in
            Jerome’s corpus of letters, a fact that is evident from analyzing the research-based gold standard of published
            Virgilian quotations from the Eclogues, Georgics, and
            the Aeneid. At the same time, precisely these short quotations are the
            core result of the digital detection process. Because of this discrepancy, the results have to be considered all
            the more critically. In order to filter out further non-relevant (i.e., false) matches prior to the phase of
            hermeneutic close reading, further strategies are presented below, derived from the phenomenological
            characteristics of known and published (i.e., contained in the gold standard) short quotations of
            Virgil in Jerome. The pairs of quotations discussed below — together with the quotation of Verg. georg. 2,256b–257a in Hier. epist. 121,10,5 discussed in connection with the Auctoritas filter
            — represent the complete list of Virgilian quotations in Jerome that have two exactly identical word forms and
            can thus be termed short.The complete list of all Virgilian quotations in Jerome
            will be the subject of a further publication.
          It should be noted that a match with two shared words can in actual fact have other shared
            words of identical form. However, these often belong to the category of synsemantics and are subsequently removed
            by applying the stoplists. In the case of the Eclogues, Georgica and Aeneid, many of the potential new quotations selected by the
            algorithm do indeed share other words in addition to two shared words These include words such
            as a, ab, ac, ad, ante, atque, autem, caelo, centum, contra, corpore, cui, cum, de, dies, dum,
            ea, enim, est, et, etiam, ex, frater, haec, hanc, hic,
            his, hoc, hominum, iam, illa, ille, in, inter, ipse, ita,
            manu, me, mihi, mundi, ne, nec, neque, nihil, non, nos,
            nunc, oculos, omnes, omnia, per, possumus, post, procul, quae, quam, quem, qui, quibus, quid, quidquid, quis, quo, quorum, sanguine, se, sed, si,
            sint, sit, siue, sua, sub, sunt, super, te, terra, uerbo,
            uix, unde, ut., which,
            however, are mostly irrelevant for the evaluation of the match as a quotation. For the Eclogues, the following numbers result: Of 89 potential new quotations (stoplist 6 applied), 87 have
            exactly two shared words; of these, 46 share additional words (53%). Similarly in the case of Georgica: Of 167 potential citation pairs (stoplist 6 applied), 153 have exactly two
            shared words; of these, 122 share further material (80%). Finally, the following numbers are
            obtained for the Aeneid: Of 606 potential new quotations (stoplist 6 applied), 583
            have exactly two shared words; of these, 414 share further words (71%). This disregard of
            synsemantic words among additional shared words indeed does mimic a manual hermeneutic
            reading but still justifies the use of the term short instead of the term two-word citation (where
            it would always need to be stated whether only shared words or all identical word forms are
            meant).
        
        
          1. Optimization strategy: Taking into account the direct environment of shared words
          The presented algorithm successfully outputs the quotation of Verg. ecl. 4,60–63 in Hier. epist. 130,16,3,
            which is contained in the gold standard, as a match; the shared words (risu; matrem) are retained.In relation to the list of potential new
            quotations after application of stoplist 6.
          
            Additional material from Virgil (cognoscat – cognoscere, infans – puer, paruulus – paruus) confirms the match as an actual quotation and thereby
              enhances close reading. In this example, instances of these pairs of words are individually underlined in both
              texts. Additionally, risu and matrem are highlighted in
              both texts.
            
              Verg. ecl. 4,60–63
              Hier. epist. 130,16,3
            
            
               Incipe, parue puer, risu cognoscere matrem: / matri longa decem tulerunt fastidia menses. /
                incipe, parue puer: qui non risere parentes, / nec deus
                hunc mensa, dea nec dignata cubili est.
               solent enim huiusce modi per angulos musitare et quasi iustitiam dei quaerere: ‘cur illa
                anima in illa est nata prouincia? quid causae extitit, ut alii de Christianis nascantur parentibus, alii
                inter feras et saeuissimas nationes, ubi nulla dei notitia est?’ cumque hoc quasi scorpionis ictu simplices
                quosque percusserint et fistulato uulnere locum sibi fecerint, uenena diffundunt: ‘putasne, frustra infans paruulus et qui uix matrem risu et uultus hilaritate cognoscat, qui nec boni aliquid fecit nec mali,
                daemone corripitur, morbo opprimitur regio et ea sustinet, quae uidemus inpios homines non sustinere et
                sustinere deo seruientes? 
            
            
              Begin, baby boy, to recognize your mother with a smile: ten months have brought your mother long travail.
                Begin, baby boy! The child who has not won a smile from his parents, no god ever honoured with his table, no
                goddess with her bed!
              Some of this kind are wont to whisper in silent corners and downright question the justice of God: ‘Why
                was that soul born in that region? What reason was found that some were conceived by Christian parents,
                others were born in savage and most wicked peoples who have no knowledge of God?’ As soon as they have shaken
                some simple people by this, as by the sting of a scorpion, and have made a place for themselves in the
                tubular wound, they spout their venom: ‘Do you think a very young child, one who barely recognizes its mother
                by her laughter and her face by her joy, who has done neither good nor bad, is seized by the devil for no
                reason, or prostrated by jaundice, or endures such things for no reason, which we see godless people do not
                suffer, but those who serve God do?’
            
          
          The syntactic relationship of the two nouns, which are in ablative and accusative case respectively, remains
            unclear at first. Nevertheless, this match can undoubtedly be regarded as an actual quotation. This is confirmed
            by the surrounding text environment. In it, additional material from Virgil’s poem is recycled (but
            not in exactly the same form!): infans paruulus can be traced back to the twice
            appearing parue puer, but neither the synonym (infans for
            puer) nor the diminutive (paruulus < paruus) are visible for the algorithm. Moreover, the verb cognoscere is
            present in the target text, albeit in inflected form, which, in both target and source text, forms the syntactic
            connection between the shared words (matrem: direct object; risu: instrumental ablative).
          This results in the optimization strategy of making invisible language material, which can be traced back
            to the target text, visible to the algorithm. As the above short quotation shows, this
            additional material in the target text can be connected to the forms of the source text in three different ways:
            by lemmatization (cf. cognoscat – cognoscere), by finding
            synonyms (cf. infans – puer), and by detecting
            etymologically related forms (cf. paruulus – paruus).
            Through these approaches more quoted words can be detected. By marking those quotations that consist of only two
            shared words but have further similar meaningful forms in the same sentence, these filters could
            significantly support the close reading.
        
        
          2. Optimization strategy: Considering the syntactic complexity of highly frequent phrases
          In book 9 of the Aeneid, Iris urges the Rutulian king Turnus to attack the Trojan
            camp with the words rumpe moras omnis et turbata arripe castra (break off delay,
            and seize the bewildered camp, 13). The phrase rumpere moras, which is
            frequently employed by poets, is used by Jerome in letter 130, where he writes: rumpe moras
            omnes (abandon all procrastination). Hagendahl cautiously counts this passage
            among the [l]ess obvious reminiscences of Virgil and thus points to the difficulty
            of an exact attribution .The same problem arises in Pliny the Younger; in
            ep. 5,10 to Suetonius he uses the words rumpe iam moras with the goal of persuading his addressee to publish a literary work. Cf.
            Schwerdtner: Da Plinius’ rumpe iam moras nicht mit letzter
            Sicherheit einer einzigen Quelle zugewiesen werden kann, ist es problematisch, die Stelle als Vergilzitat
            bezeichnen zu wollen, auch wenn Plinius sonst bevorzugt aus Vergil zitiert und bereits in ep. 5,8 auf das Georgicaproömium zurückgreift .
          
            The syntactic similarities validate the match as an actual quotation and improve the close reading of the
              text. In this example, rumpe and moras are highlighted in
              both texts. Additionally, omnis and omnes are
              underlined.
            
              Verg. Aen. 9,5–13
              Hier. epist. 130,5,3
            
            
               ad quem sic roseo Thaumantias ore locuta est: / ‘Turne, quod optanti diuum promittere nemo
                / auderet, uoluenda dies en attulit ultro. / Aeneas urbe et sociis et classe relicta / sceptra Palatini
                sedemque petit Euandri. / nec satis: extremas Corythi penetrauit ad urbes / Lydorumque manum, collectos armat
                agrestis. / quid dubitas? nunc tempus equos, nunc poscere currus: / rumpe moras omnis et turbata arripe castra.’
               urbs tua, quondam orbis caput, Romani populi sepulchrum est, et tu in Libyco litore exulem
                uirum ipsa exul accipies? quam habitura pronubam? quo deducenda comitatu? stridor linguae Punicae procacia
                tibi fescennina cantabit. rumpe moras omnes. perfecta dilectio
                foras mittit timorem. adsume scutum fidei, loricam iustitiae, galeam salutis, procede ad proelium. habet et
                seruata pudicitia martyrium suum. quid metuis auiam? quid formidas parentem? forsitan et ipsae uelint, quod
                te uelle non credunt.
            
            
              To him, with roseate lips, thus spoke the child of Thaumas: ‘Turnus, what no god dared to promise to your
                prayers, see––the circling hour has brought unasked! Aeneas, leaving town, comrades and fleet, seeks the
                Palatine realm and Evander’s dwelling. Nor does that suffice; he has won his way to Corythus’ furthest
                cities, and is mustering the Lydian country folk in armed bands. Why hesitate? Now, now is the hour to call
                for steed and chariot; break off delay, and seize the bewildered camp!
              Your city, once the head of the world, is the tomb of the Roman people, and will you, even in exile,
                accept a man, also exiled, on the coast of Libya? What matchmaker shalt thou have? By what companion shalt
                thou be led home? The hiss of the Punic language will sing cheeky Fescennine wedding songs for thee. Abandon
                all procrastination. Perfect love sends fear at the door. Seize the shield of faith, the armor of
                righteousness, the helmet of salvation, march out to battle. Even the preservation of chastity holds its own
                martyrdom. What do you fear your grandmother? What do you fear your mother? Maybe they even want for you what
                they don't think you want.
            
          
          However, here again the additional linguistic material is striking: Jerome does not only write rumpe moras, but strengthens his request — like Virgil in Verg. Aen. 9,13 — with omnes (= omnis Thus, the total number of identical word forms would amount to three; the quotation would
            then not be listed among those quotations of Virgil in Jerome with exactly two identical words. On this problem
            of the textual tradition, see 3. Optimization strategy.). Both
            instances thus have the same syntactic complexity (predicate + object + attribute
            adjective). Other instances of the phrase rumpere moras therefore seem to be rather
            unlikely as pre-texts, such as Verg. Aen. 4,569 (heia age, rumpe moras – Up then, break off delay) and Verg. georg. 3,43 (rumpe moras; uocat ingenti clamore Cithaeron – break
            with slow delay! With mighty clamour Cithaeron calls), the earliest instance of the phrase.
          The following returned match, which cannot be considered a quotation based on these considerations, illustrates
            ex negativo that recycling syntactic complexity increases the plausibility of a
            quotation:
          
            Greater syntactic complexity in Jerome’s text activates the figurative meaning of culmen (summit), unlike Virgil’s literal use. In this example, culmine and summo are highlighted in both texts. Additionally, de, in, and uirtutum are
              underlined.
            
              Verg. georg. 1,401–403
              Hier. epist. 108,17,1
            
            
               at nebulae magis ima petunt campoque recumbunt, / solis et occasum seruans de culmine summo / nequiquam seros exercet noctua cantus.
               Uerum haec possunt communia esse cum <non> paucis et scit diabolus non in summo uirtutum culmine posita.
            
            
              But the mists are prone to seek the valleys, and rest on the plain, and the owl, as she watches the
                sunset from some high peak, vainly plies her evening song.
              But these things can be common to a few, and the devil knows that they are not on the highest pinnacle of
                virtue.
            
          
          It is obvious that despite the presence of two shared words (summo;
            culmine) there is no reference to Virgil’s line. This is due to the different nature
            of the prepositional phrases in which the shared words are found. Besides the semantic difference in
            the prepositions themselves (de vs. in), it is then, above
            all, the greater syntactic complexity of Jerome’s phrasing; the identical culmine is
            complemented by an attribute genitive (uirtutum). In particular, the addition of this
            attribute genitive activates the figurative meaning of culmen
            (summit), whereas in Virgil culmen refers to a roof ridge. The same
            phenomenon is even more noticeable in another returned match consisting of Verg. georg. 1,401–403 and Hier. epist.
            116,5,2. Again, there are the same two shared words culmine and
            summo. However, in addition to the semantically different prepositions (de vs. in) as well as the attribute genitive (auctoritatis) activating the figurative meaning, the expression is even more complex because of a second
            attribute (caelesti). 
            In this example, culmine and summo are highlighted in
              both texts. Additionally, de is underlined in the text from Virgil and in, along with the phrase et caelesti auctoritatis, is also
              underlined in the text from Jerome.
            
              Verg. georg. 1,401–403
              Hier. epist. 116,5,2
            
            
              at nebulae magis ima petunt campoque recumbunt, / solis et occasum seruans de culmine summo / nequiquam seros exercet noctua cantus
              immo uero sanctam scripturam in summo et caelesti auctoritatis
                culmine conlocatam de ueritate eius certus ac securus
                legam
            
            
              But the mists are prone to seek the valleys, and rest on the plain, and the owl, as she watches the
                sunset from some high peak, vainly plies her evening song
              but of course I should read the holy scriptures, set on the highest, heavenly summit of validity, firmly
                convinced of their truth
            
              
          The analysis of syntactic complexity thus highlights a difference of source and target text,Virgil:
            preposition + propositional object + attribute adjective; Jerome: preposition + attribute adjective I [+
            conjunction] + attribute adjective II + attribute genitive + propositional object. which seems to make
            semantic shifts detectable for the algorithm. Based on these considerations, a filter (to be implemented after
            part-of-speech tagging) is being developed that analyzes the syntactic structure underlying the shared
            words and checks whether the syntactic complexity is similar in both source and target text. Increased
            syntactic complexity in one of the two texts considerably reduces the plausibility of a citation. Additionally,
            the absence of complexity (i.e., especially the absence of one or more attributes) seems to be an indication that
            there is no citation, especially in simple adverbial ablative phrases like sole orto
            and toto orbe. Frequent adverbials of place and time could be eliminated in this
            way.
        
        
          3. Optimization strategy: Taking into account the manuscript tradition
          A fundamental problem that largely eludes the digital analysis tools is the consideration of the manuscript
            tradition. The algorithm presented here can only take into account a single wording. For example, for the
            citation pairs of Hier. epist. 126,2,2/129,4,3 = Verg. Aen. 4,42–43 shown below, the digital analysis produces
            only two shared words (lateque; Barcaei). In
            fact, the manuscripts of the Aeneid also give the reading uagantes (roaming) in addition to furentes (raging), which Jerome obviously refers toThe status as an intentional quotation of the
            Aeneid cannot be questioned because of the references to Uergilius (Hier. epist. 126,2,2) and the poeta eloquentissimus (129,4,3). — and not just in this passage.Another
            occurrence of the phrase within the works of Jerome can be found in In Isaeam
            5,21,13–17. Hagendahl (1958, p. 230 n. 4) already points to the fact that
            uagantes is present in a number of late manuscripts of the Aeneid. Indeed, the critical apparatus of Conte’s Teubner edition lists
            uagantes as another reading instead of furentes, which can,
            besides Jerome, also be traced back to two Codices Bernenses from the 9th and 10th
            century. If uagantes was chosen in the underlying digital text of the Aeneid, the digital analysis process could have detected (depending on the respective
            stoplist) up to three shared words.
          
            Digital analysis tool finds only two shared words (lateque, Barcaei) but manuscripts of the Aeneid offer alternative
              readings (e.g., uagantes instead of furentes), which
              Jerome references. In this example, latque and Barcaei
              are highlighted in both texts.
            
              Verg. Aen. 4,31–44
              Hier. epist. 126,2,2
            
            
               Anna refert: ‘o luce magis dilecta sorori, / solane perpetua maerens carpere iuuenta, /
                nec dulcis natos Veneris nec praemia noris? / id cinerem aut manis credis curare sepultos? / esto: aegram
                nulli quondam flexere mariti, / non Libyae, non ante Tyro; despectus Iarbas / ductoresque alii, quos Africa
                terra triumphis / diues alit: placitone etiam pugnabis amori? / nec uenit in mentem quorum consederis aruis?
                / hinc Gaetulae urbes, genus insuperabile bello, / et Numidae infreni cingunt et inhospita Syrtis; / hinc
                deserta siti regio lateque furentes / Barcaei. quid bella Tyro surgentia dicam / germanique
                minas?
               hoc autem anno, cum tres explicassem libros, subitus impetus barbarorum, de quibus tuus
                dicit Uergilius: lateque uagantes Barcaei et sancta scriptura de Ismahel: contra faciem
                omnium fratrum suorum habitabit, sic Aegypti limitem, Palaestinae, Phoenices, Syriae percucurrit ad instar
                torrentis cuncta secum trahens, ut uix manus eorum misericordia Christi potuerimus euadere. quodsi iuxta
                inclitum oratorem silent inter arma leges, quanto magis studia scripturarum, quae et librorum multitudine et
                silentio ac librariorum sedulitate, quodque uel proprium est, securitate et otio dictantium indigent!
            
            
              Anna replies: ‘O you who are dearer to your sister than the light, are you, lonely and sad, going to pine
                away all your youth long, and know not sweet children or love’s rewards? Do you think that dust or buried
                shades give heed to that? Grant that until now no wooers moved your sorrow, not in Libya, nor before then in
                Tyre; that Iarbas was slighted, and other lords whom the African land, rich in triumphs, rears; will you
                wrestle also with a love that pleases? And does it not come to your mind whose lands you have settled in? On
                this side Gaetulian cities, a race invincible in war, unbridled Numidians, and the unfriendly Syrtis hem you
                in; on that side lies a tract barren with drought, and Barcaeans, raging far and wide. Why speak of the wars
                rising from Tyre, and your brother’s threats ...?
              In this year, however, when I had already explained three books, a sudden onslaught of the barbarians,
                about whom your Virgil says: ‘the far-roaming Barkaeans’ and the holy scripture about Ishmael: ‘opposed to
                the face of all his brothers he shall live’, overtook the borders of Egypt, Palestine, Phoenicia, Syria and
                swept away everything like a torrent, so that we could escape their clutches just by the mercy of Christ. But
                if, according to the famous orator, laws are silent in war, how much more the occupation with the Scriptures,
                which requires a multitude of books, rest as well as busyness of the scribes and finally, as a special
                characteristic, the security and leisure for the person dictating!
            
          
          
            Another example for this challenge. In this example, latque and Barcaei are highlighted in both texts. Additionally, the phrase facit
              poeta eloquentissimus mentionem is underlined in the text from Jerome.
            
              Verg. Aen. 4,31–44
              Hier. epist. 129,4,3
            
            
               Anna refert: ‘o luce magis dilecta sorori, / solane perpetua maerens carpere iuuenta, /
                nec dulcis natos Veneris nec praemia noris? / id cinerem aut manis credis curare sepultos? / esto: aegram
                nulli quondam flexere mariti, / non Libyae, non ante Tyro; despectus Iarbas / ductoresque alii, quos Africa
                terra triumphis / diues alit: placitone etiam pugnabis amori? / nec uenit in mentem quorum consederis aruis?
                / hinc Gaetulae urbes, genus insuperabile bello, / et Numidae infreni cingunt et inhospita Syrtis; / hinc
                deserta siti regio lateque furentes / Barcaei. quid bella Tyro surgentia dicam / germanique
                minas?
               ab Ioppe usque ad uiculum nostrum Bethleem quadraginta sex milia sunt, cui succedit
                uastissima solitudo plena ferocium barbarorum, de quibus dicitur: contra faciem omnium fratrum tuorum
                habitabis et quorum facit poeta eloquentissimus mentionem: lateque uagantes Barcaei, a Barca oppido, quod in solitudine situm est, quos nunc corrupto sermone Afri
                Baricianos uocant. hi sunt, qui pro locorum qualitatibus diuersis nominibus appellantur et a Mauritania per
                Africam et Aegyptum Palaestinamque et Phoenicem, Coelen Syriam et Osrohenen, Mesopotamiam atque Persidem
                tendunt ad Indiam.
            
            
              Anna replies: ‘O you who are dearer to your sister than the light, are you, lonely and sad, going to pine
                away all your youth long, and know not sweet children or love’s rewards? Do you think that dust or buried
                shades give heed to that? Grant that until now no wooers moved your sorrow, not in Libya, nor before then in
                Tyre; that Iarbas was slighted, and other lords whom the African land, rich in triumphs, rears; will you
                wrestle also with a love that pleases? And does it not come to your mind whose lands you have settled in? On
                this side Gaetulian cities, a race invincible in war, unbridled Numidians, and the unfriendly Syrtis hem you
                in; on that side lies a tract barren with drought, and Barcaeans, raging far and wide. Why speak of the wars
                rising from Tyre, and your brother’s threats ...?
              From Jaffa to our little village of Bethlehem is a distance of 46 miles, adjoining which is a vast
                wasteland, full of savage barbarians, about whom it is said: ‘opposed to the face of all thy brethren shalt
                thou live,’ and the mention of which our most eloquent poet thus forms: ‘the far-roaming Barkaeans,’ namely,
                from the city of Barka, which is situated in the wasteland, whom the Africans now call, in a neglected manner
                of speech, Barikians. These are the ones whom they call by different names according to the nature of the
                places, stretching from Mauritania through Africa and Egypt, Palestine and Phoenicia, Syria Coele and
                Osrhoene, Mesopotamia and Persia to India.
            
          
          Both pairs of quotations show that especially in the phase of manual-hermeneutical evaluation of potential new
            quotations special attention must also be paid to the possibility of different readings within the manuscript
            tradition. Thus, consultation of the critical apparatus is essential.Cf. the correspondence of omnes and omnis above in Verg. Aen. 9,13 = Hier. epist.
            130,5,3 also see 2. Optimization strategy, n. 39. The case of
            the variants furentes/uagantes shows that divergences
            within the manuscript tradition can go far beyond similar lemmata and synonyms. Digital texts that preserve the
            breadth of the manuscript tradition as much as possible and present it in an algorithm-compatible form can thus
            be seen as an urgent desideratum in the field of digital text analysis. Since the current digital Teubner editions do not (yet) meet these specific needs, we test the definition of minimal
            deviations in letter sequences as an immediately implementable replacement strategy. It is also possible that
            this approach will prove to be more efficient from a procedural point of view.Variants are considered
            comprehensively, but more extensive editorial changes such as omissions, conjectures, etc. cannot be
            addressed.
        
        
          4. Optimization strategy: Repeated quotations as evidence for source-text familiarity
          The phrase experto credite (trust the one who has experienced
            it) from book 11 of the Aeneid is used by Jerome in Hier.
            epist. 84,3,5 as credite experto.
          
            Despite the shortness, this is a quotation because Jerome previously quoted the lines in full. In this
              example, experto and credite are highlighted in both
              texts.
            
              Verg. Aen. 11,278–287
              Hier. epist. 84,3,5
            
            
               ne uero, ne me ad talis impellite pugnas: / nec mihi cum Teucris ullum post eruta bellum /
                Pergama nec ueterum memini laetorue malorum. / munera quae patriis ad me portatis ab oris / uertite ad
                Aenean. stetimus tela aspera contra / contulimusque manus: experto credite quantus / in clipeum adsurgat,
                quo turbine torqueat hastam. / si duo praeterea talis Idaea tulisset / terra uiros, ultro Inachias uenisset
                ad urbes / Dardanus et uersis lugeret Graecia fatis.
               quod autem opponunt congregasse me libros illius super cunctos homines, utinam omnium
                tractatorum haberem uolumina, ut tarditatem ingenii lectionis diligentia conpensarem! congregaui libros eius,
                fateor; et ideo errores non sequor, quia scio uniuersa, quae scripsit. credite experto, quasi Christianus
                Christianis loquor: uenenata sunt illius dogmata, aliena a scripturis sanctis, uim scripturis facientia.
                legi, inquam, legi Origenem et, si in legendo crimen est, fateor — et nostrum marsuppium Alexandrinae chartae
                euacuarunt — : si mihi creditis, Origeniastes numquam fui; si non creditis, nunc esse cessaui.
            
            
              Do not, do not urge me to such battles! I have no war with Teucer’s race since Troy’s towers fell, and I
                have no joyful memory of those ancient ills. The gifts that you bring me from your country, take them rather
                to Aeneas. We have faced his fierce weapons, and fought him hand to hand: trust one who has experienced it,
                how huge he looms above his shield, with what whirlwind he hurls his spear! Had Ida’s land borne two others
                like him, the Trojans would even have stormed the towns of Inachus, and Greece would be mourning, with fate
                reversed.
              But this they oppose, that I have gathered together the books of that one about all men; oh, if I had the
                volumes of all commentators, in order to compensate the slowness of the mind by the diligence of the reading!
                I have collected his books, I confess; and therefore, I do not follow errors, because I know all that he has
                written. Trust the one who has experienced it, as if I speak to Christians as a Christian; poisoned are his
                doctrines, strange in relation to the sacred writings, because they do violence to them. Yes, I have read, I
                say, I have read Origen, and, if in reading there is an offense, I confess it — and my purse emptied
                Alexandrian leaves — : If you believe me, I was never a follower of Origen; if you do not believe me, I have
                now ceased to be one.
            
          
          Due to the shortness of the phrase — and also since it is not the only possible sourceCf., for example,
            Ov. ars 3,511 and Sen. Thy. 81. — this match does not look like an obvious quotation at first
            glance. Nevertheless, the instance in Jerome is accepted as a quotation of Virgil by scholars. The key indicator
            for this verdict is the reuse of the quotation, albeit in shorter form: Jerome has already quoted these lines of
            the Aeneid in full in Hier. epist.
            50,4,2. For the evaluation of potential new quotations, this observation results in the strategy of
            comparing several instances (if any) of short quotations. If a short quotation occurs elsewhere as
            part of a longer quotation, familiarity with the pre-text seems plausible and thus increases the match’s
            potential to be an actual quotation.
        
      

        V. Concluding remarks and outlook
        From the analysis of published short quotations of Virgil in Jerome consequences arise in two
          respects. On the one hand, concrete optimization strategies for the algorithm can be deduced from phenomenological
          properties of the text passages. These are: 
          (a) the lemmatization of the close environment of quotations,
          (b) the analysis of syntactic complexity, especially of compact frequent phrases,
          (c) the consideration of the manuscript tradition, and 
          (d) the testing for iteration of quotations or quotation fragments.
           On the other hand, independent of the aptitude and effectiveness of the filters developed on the basis of
          these considerations, the analysis of the short quotations of Virgil in Jerome also expands the
          horizon of the manual-hermeneutic reading process: strikingly, none of the quotations result only from the sum of
          the shared words. Indeed, an intentional quotation is only recognizable when: 
          (a) either further quoted words (inflected or replaced by synonyms) or an explicit reference
            (e.g. naming the source author) are found in the environment,
          (b) high-frequency phrases are quoted in their exact syntactic structure (and thus at the same
            time are longer quotations),
          (c) editorial changes obscure further shared words (precisely a problem of
            computer-aided access to digital texts), or 
          (d) finally the reuse of a quotation fragment can be proven.
          
        These findings, which also shed light on Jerome’s citation technique, are of central importance for any further
          systematization of citation recognition processes, as they define initial minimum standards for citations
          and thus make the structured parameters of citation theory visible and transparent — and easier to
          operationalize.
        
      

        Primary Sources
        
          Conte, G. B. (ed.) (2019) P. Vergilius Maro.
            Aeneis. Editio Altera. Berlin/Boston: Walter de Gruyter.
          Fairclough, H. R. (transl.) (1999) Virgil. Eclogues. Georgics. Aeneid: Books 1-6. Revised by G. P. Goold. Loeb
            Classical Library, 63. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
          Fairclough, H. R. (transl.) (1999) Virgil. Aeneid: Books 7-12. Appendix Vergiliana. Revised by G. P. Goold. Loeb Classical Library, 64.
            Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
          Hilberg, I. (ed.) (1996) S. Eusebii
            Hieronymi Epistulae. Pars I: I–LXX. 2 edn. Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der
            Wissenschaften.
          Hilberg, I. (ed.) (1996) S. Eusebii
            Hieronymi Epistulae. Pars II: LXXI–CXX. 2 edn. Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der
            Wissenschaften.
          Hilberg, I. (ed.) (1996) S. Eusebii
            Hieronymi Epistulae. Pars III: CXXI–CLIV. 2 edn. Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der
            Wissenschaften.
          Ottaviano, S. and Conte, G. B. (eds.) (2013)
            P. Vergilius Maro. Bucolica et Georgica. Berlin/Boston: Walter de Gruyter.
        
      
