Title:  The Digital Classicist: building a Digital
                    Humanities Community
Volume:  011
Issue:  3
Date:  2 October 2017
Abstract:  
                
                There has been much discussion about digital humanities (DH) both as a discipline
                    and as a community of practice. This paper is based on my talk given to open the
                        Leipzig eHumanities Seminar series and is presented here with many thanks to
                        the organisers for their kind and generous invitation. Thanks also to the
                        DHQ reviewers whose valuable comments have helped me to strengthen this
                        paper. Whatever the balance of opinion, the emergence
                    of digital scholarship in the humanities has undoubtedly had considerable impact
                    on many disciplines; one such discipline is Classics and the study of the
                    ancient world more generally. This article uses the Digital Classicist (DC) as
                    an example of a DH community in a case study which traces its development and
                    growth to examine what might be learned. As a community the DC joins together
                    practitioners interested in the application of innovative digital methods and
                    technology to the study of the ancient world (in its widest sense). How has this
                    come about and perhaps more importantly, how has it been sustained and indeed
                    provided the inspiration for other affiliated communities? What do we understand
                    by a community and the association of individual practitioners separated by
                    distance? It is important that members feel that they are stakeholders, that
                    they have a sense of ownership and derive value from participation and
                    contribution. It is argued here that a community could be seen as a symbolic and
                    intellectual construct, one of perception rather than physicality to facilitate
                    the exchange of ideas and so effect growth and strengthen the discipline.
            
Full Body Text: 

                Introduction
                The Digital Classicist is used here as a case study for looking at the
                    development of and more importantly how we might sustain a Digital Humanities
                    (DH) community. This paper examines the background to the foundation of the
                    Digital Classicist (DC), how it all came about; its development, why it evolved
                    in the way that it did; presents some reflections on what was learned along the
                    way, and, looking ahead, considers where, as a community, we might go from here.
                    Putting this in the wider context, it asks the question why, how and when does a
                    community become a community and how do we recognise one as such?
            

                Background
                What is the motivation that is needed to start a community of this type? Firstly,
                    it needs a critical mass of people coming together with similar interests and
                    then the necessary spark of an idea combined with the will to make it happen.
                    The DC certainly had its antecedents both in Classics and cognate disciplines.
                    The Digital Medievalist The Digital
                        Medievalist website and online journal: http://www.digitalmedievalist.org was established in 2003
                    and indeed many people (scholars, practitioners, and students) are members of
                    both communities as we have many common interests and concerns; the DC however
                    looks back to Ross Scaife and the Stoa Consortium for
                        Electronic Publication in the Humanities which was established in
                    1997 for inspiration and with the introduction of the Stoa blog in December 2003 being a mobilising catalyst. The
                        Stoa Consortium blog, Serving news, projects, and links for digital
                            classicists everywhere.
                        http://www.stoa.org See also: In memoriam Ross Scaife (1960-2008) http://www.stoa.org/archives/786. Quatenus nobis denegatur
                            diu vivere, relinquamus aliquid, quo nos vixisse testemur (Pliny
                        EP.3.7.14)
                The DC was established in 2004 and set up as a community of users to provide a
                    central hub to draw together practitioners interested in the application of
                    innovative digital methods and technology to the study of the ancient world (in
                    its widest sense). The launch of the DC into the wider world could be said to
                    have been at the presentation of the prize-winning poster at the Digital
                    Resources in the Humanities (DRH) conference held at Lancaster in September
                        2005. DRH Lancaster 2005 http://projects.oucs.ox.ac.uk/DRHA/2005/drh2005-programme.pdf
                    This was at a time when we called what we did Humanities Computing as the
                    proto-Digital Humanities and hence: Humanities Computing
                        applied to the study of the Ancient World was the poster strapline
                    (see Fig. 1).
                
                    The prize-winning DC poster at DRH Lancaster 2005. Wikimedia Commons http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Digitalclassicistposter.jpg
                    
                
                Establishment means creating a presence and clearly an online one was needed with
                    the setting up of the website which was quickly followed by a wiki (see Figs 2
                    and 3). Digital Classicist webpage http://www.digitalclassicist.org and wiki http://wiki.digitalclassicist.org Collaboration and
                    cooperation are central to the DC philosophy and from Fig. 2 it is possible to
                    see the links to the many partnerships that were set up with other projects.
                    Setting up in competition with any of these was never the intention but rather
                    to provide a central web-based focus for research in this rich, diverse, and
                    multi-national field of scholarship . For
                        examples of the breadth and diversity of the field of digital classics see:
                        Crane, G. and Terras, M. eds  and Babeu . One of the stated aims of the DC is to
                    bring scholars together and to address head-on the issues of collaborative
                    working; hence the additional use of a wiki: 
                        […] as well as sharing information about themselves and
                            their own work, members collaboratively compile, review and comment upon
                            articles on digital projects, tools and research questions of particular
                            relevance to the ancient world. They also list guides to practice,
                            introduce the discussion forum and, most importantly, list events. It is
                            these events that more than anything else define the Digital Classicist
                            community by providing a showcase for our members' research and a venue
                            for discussion, introductions, and inspiration for new collaborative
                            relationships and projects. 
                        
                    
                
                    The Digital Classicist webpage: http://www.digitalclassicist.org (17/08/2014)
                    
                
                
                    The Digital Classicist Wiki: http://wiki.digitalclassicist.org (23/08/2014)
                    
                
                In 2006 the Digital Classicist Wiki was presented and discussed in the context of
                    openness and collaborative working by this author at the 7th Computers,
                    Literature and Philology (CLiP) conference: Literatures,
                        Languages and Cultural Heritage in a digital world, held at King's
                    College London. The only surviving webpage with details of this event is
                        at the Digital Medievalist https://digitalmedievalist.wordpress.com/2007/03/31/clip-2006/
                    
                Importantly, and in the same year, the Digital Classicist Summer seminar series
                    was launched at the Institute of Classical Studies (ICS), Senate House London.
                    This too had an antecedent in the form of an earlier series run by the
                    organisers. This was effectively the proto-DC seminar series and (ironically)
                    named The Summer Ersatz WiP (Work-in-Progress) seminar as it occupied the same slot as the
                    Postgraduate Work-in-Progress routinely run by students (with staff excluded
                    except by specific invitation) on a Friday afternoon with the added bonus to
                    finish early and to socialise. This proto-seminar series was entirely the
                        idea (and arguably the first foundation of the DC) of Gabriel Bodard who
                        solicited this author's assistance simply to help with the logistics and to
                        deal with room bookings.  The Ersatz
                    series ran during the Summer of 2004 as the vibrant and comprehensive seminar
                    programme in Classics supported by the ICS ran in Term time only. We ran our
                    early seminars (and later the DC series) in the Summer because nobody else did;
                    the precedent was set and proved to be valuable experience in setting up and
                    running a successful seminar series.
                
                    The sole surviving promotional flyer from the Ersatz series (with thanks to Kim Shahabudin and used with
                        permission).
                    
                
                Running a seminar series once is a one off; running it for
                    two consecutive years and it is possibly only a follow on
                    (fitting in the papers that could not be included in the first round); run it
                    for the third consecutive year and it is then established with support in place
                    and every expectation that it will grow and continue to thrive. The most
                        important support throughout has been from the ICS who have generously
                        provided the rooms, equipment and general expenses. Over the years,
                        additional support has come from the Centre for Computing in the Humanities
                        (now the Department of Digital Humanities (DDH)) and the Centre for
                        e-Research (CeRch) both at King's College London. More recent years have
                        seen the co-sponsorship of video recording of the seminars by the UCL Centre
                        for Digital Humanities (UCLDH), DDH and the Department of Classics, Kings
                        College London. Pulling together a nucleus of people willing to give
                    their time for the organising and also members of the community willing to
                    present research papers suggests the possibility of further endeavours. For the
                    DC, this gave the impetus and inspiration for two panels presented at the
                    Classical Association (CA) Annual Conference 2007 held in Birmingham: Research into people and places and Interdisciplinary approaches to research and
                        pedagogy. University of Birmingham Programme CA2007: http://www.classicalassociation.org/pastconferences/Birmingham
                            2007.pdf; DC Wiki CA2007 abstracts http://wiki.digitalclassicist.org/CA2007_abstracts The DC
                    was presenting Digital Humanities research at a mainstream Classics conference
                    under the aegis of the largest Classical organisation in the UK as well as at
                    the ICS which is arguably the foremost Classics Institute in the UK, if not the
                    world. Further DC research has been presented at later CA conferences: Glasgow
                    (2009) Ancient World and e-Science The Stoa
                        Consortium blog: http://www.stoa.org/?p=889; Cardiff (2010) Linked data for archaeology and geography 2010
                        Classical Association Annual Conference programme http://www.classicalassociation.org/pastconferences/Cardiff%202010.pdf;
                    Nottingham (2014) Open Educational Resources and their
                        place in teaching and research for Classics. 2014 Classical
                        Association Annual Conference programme http://www.nottingham.ac.uk/classics/documents/classical-association/ca-conf-programme.pdf
                    The CA conference in Durham in 2011 saw not only two DC panels: Teaching and Publication of Classics in the Internet
                        Age and Ancient Space, Linked Data and Digital
                        Research but also a dedicated Digital Classicist Training Day
                    featuring Generic Web Tools and the Papyrological editor. 2011 Classical Association
                        Annual Conference https://www.dur.ac.uk/classics/events/ca_conference2011 and the
                        DC Training Day programme http://www.dur.ac.uk/resources/classics/DigitalClassicistWorkshop.doc
                    DC research papers have not been limited to the CA but have also been presented
                    at the American Philological Association (APA), Computer Applications in
                    Archaeology Conference (CAA), Digital Resources for the Humanities and Arts
                    (DRHA), and Digital Humanities; DC takes digital humanities to the Classics and
                    classics to the Digital Humanities. For a comprehensive list of DC
                        presentations and the wide range of conferences see the Stoa and search the
                        category conferences: http://www.stoa.org/archives/category/events/event-conferences
                
            

                Development
                The Digital Classicist was always considered by the founders to be a
                        network to link together people and organisations; a
                    community of users set up by and for practitioners interested in the application
                    of DH methodologies to the study of the ancient world . Putting out information gave it a more public voice and a clearer
                    focus with seminars and conference panels giving our members a forum as well as
                    a voice. There is a Jiscmail-hosted mailing list for dissemination of
                    information, making connections and starting conversations and
                        discussions. Digital Classicist mailing list http://wiki.digitalclassicist.org/Discussion However, just
                    as with the website and the wiki these are virtual ways in which we connect and
                    communicate asynchronously with our fellows; it is primarily the seminars and
                    also secondarily the conferences that give a locus, a physical presence to the
                    DC. 
                As well as the mailing list, other communication channels were set up with the
                    obligatory blog being one. However, after an initial period it was incorporated
                    with the Stoa to avoid repetition and to keep one central focus. The Stoa
                        Consortium: Serving news, projects, and links for digital classicists
                            everywhere. http://www.stoa.org
                
                
                    The Stoa Consortium blog http://www.stoa.org/archives/1568 (23/08/13)
                    
                
                As previously mentioned, the DC was always conceived of as a community and a
                    network of users. The wiki was set up as a collaborative medium to allow members
                    to compile, review and comment on digital tools, projects and research questions
                    that would be of interest to them. As with all wikis this had no pre-set design
                    structure but has grown organically over the years in particular in response to
                    DC members as they are the authors of the content. For an in-depth
                        discussion of the DC Wiki and its use as an example of open collaboration
                        see . In this way it should follow the
                    interests of the members as well as opening up the opportunities for
                    collaborative working which again reinforces the community aspect of the DC.
                    Indeed, the content of the Guides to Good Practice, FAQs, Tools, and Projects
                    pages should be considered research output in their own right. As the wiki
                    platform is more than simple static webpages it allows for additions and
                    amendments not only by the author but also by other members. The wiki is
                        open and so anyone can view and download the material but only members with
                        editing rights are able to upload and edit or otherwise make changes to the
                        content. See the members list at: http://wiki.digitalclassicist.org/Members
                     The wiki format, set up in this way, can be considered to provide
                    rolling and ongoing peer review and again provide another focus for a
                        community. For a wider discussion and further bibliography regarding
                        wikis in the context of building and sustaining online communities see . Moreover, all the original content
                    published in the DC Wiki is released under a Creative Commons Attribution
                        License More precisely this is a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0
                        Unported License (CC BY 3.0) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/, which allows for
                        sharing and adaptation to help redistribution and building upon the
                        material. allowing it to be shared, distributed and adapted so long
                    as it is appropriately attributed and not subject to any further restrictions. 
                Following the successful establishment of the DC seminar series as an annual
                    event, they have been helped each year with an ever-widening programme that
                    seeks to include research students as well as early career researchers and
                    established practitioners. The emphasis throughout has been on new innovative
                    techniques and methodologies which advance the research interests of classicists
                    (in the widest sense to include all cognate areas of interest such as
                    historians, palaeographers, epigraphists and archaeologists) as well as
                    information specialists or digital humanists. Indeed, the annual call
                        for papers specifies that proposals for papers should have an
                    academic research agenda relevant to at least one of these fields. 
                One aspect of the DC seminars that is often commented on by speakers and visitors
                    alike is the relaxed atmosphere and particularly so after the formal
                    presentation is concluded which then allows and indeed encourages further
                    discussion in an informal setting. This is where the networking and discussions
                    that result in the exchange of ideas and the plans for collaboration take place.
                    This is a throwback to the original proto-DC seminars of the Ersatz series where the point was to have fun and be a
                    foil to the oh-so formal seminars that were held in term time; an excuse to
                    finish study early on a Friday and come together with other postgraduate
                    students. 
                That said, there have been developments over the years. A growing reputation
                    attracts international speakers and audience; the DC seminars have worldwide
                    appeal and hence in response to requests we started making audio recordings and
                    posting them online together with the presentation slides. A full archive
                        of all slides, audio and video recordings is maintained on the DC website
                        seminar page http://www.digitalclassicist.org/wip. This has now been
                        supplemented with the addition of the Digital Classicist London Seminars
                        YouTube channel https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCIamtu1Z62wL5XRk2mE8HKw and
                        SlideShare collection http://www.slideshare.net/DigitalClassicistLondon For the
                    first time in 2013, and with the help of a professional videographer and some
                    funding from the UCL Centre for Digital Humanities and the Department of Digital
                    Humanities at King's, there are video recordings as well as audio and slides to
                    help to create a more permanent record as well as an archive. With thanks
                        and acknowledgement for the videos to: the Department of Digital Humanities
                        at King's College
                            London and the UCL Centre
                            for Digital Humanities. All the seminar listings from 2006 to the
                        present along with slides and recordings (where available) are on the DC
                        seminar webpage: http://www.digitalclassicist.org/wip
                
                The seminars and conference panels create a nucleus of research and so
                    publications became the next appropriate step to make the DC more than a
                    transient entity. Selected papers from the inaugural DC seminar series in 2006
                    along with one from a conference panel and another specially commissioned were
                    published in a special collaborative issue of the Digital
                        Medievalist
                    . This seemed a natural venue for the DC's first
                    publication as the Digital Medievalist already had an established and robust
                    publications platform and peer review mechanism; additionally, both Classics and
                    Medieval projects have a long history of pushing forward the digital agenda
                    through the works of Roberto Busa and IBM on the Index
                        Thomisticus
                        Index Thomisticus: http://www.corpusthomisticum.org/it/index.age;jsessionid=6C24FC710B5C992C12A04D5FC2080486,
                    through the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae
                        Thesaurus Linguae Graecae: http://www.tlg.uci.edu and
                    a host of other innovative projects. A first DC print publication appeared in
                    2010 as part of the Ashgate series, Digital Research in the
                        Arts and Humanities, with peer-reviewed contributions based on
                    presentations from seminars and conference panels in 2007 and 2008 ; this was followed in 2013 with another peer-reviewed
                    publication this time in the ICS in-house journal the Bulletin of the Institute of Classical Studies (BICS) . During the revision of this article we have seen
                    another important and innovative DC publication edited by organisers of the
                    seminars in London and Berlin focussing on collaborative and public-facing
                    digital research that engages non-academic and other broader audiences . These print publications ironically have given the
                        Digital Classicist space on library shelves as well as
                    online.
                The seminars have become central to our activities and give a focus for the DC as
                    a community. They promote the research activities of our members; they allow the
                    promotion of the DC; they raise the profile of our speakers. This final point is
                    important for, as well as publishing the presentation online, the DC has an
                    extensive promotions network which as well as announcing the programme, pushes
                    out weekly notifications of speaker and abstract. This is further supported by
                    announcements on the Stoa, the Institute of Classical Studies and the University
                    of London School of Advanced Studies networks. Both the DC and our members take
                    advantage of social media and particularly Twitter. Using the hashtag
                    #DigiClass, blog announcements are automatically tweeted by
                    the Stoa and then individually circulated by the organisers and members to their
                    own followers. Live tweeting is also encouraged at the
                    seminars and any other DC event. The emphasis is changing from static to dynamic
                    but as well as this the seminars create a focus through the Summer months both
                    online and in the ICS. As well as in time the DC now has a
                    presence in space, a physical as well as virtual location.
                
            

                Community
                What is it that makes a community and particularly a scholarly one? As discussed
                    earlier, as well as sharing information about themselves and their own work, DC
                    members collaboratively compile, review and comment upon articles on digital
                    projects, tools and research questions of particular relevance to the ancient
                    world. They also list guides to practice, introduce the discussion forum and,
                    most importantly, list events. It is argued here that it is these events more
                    than anything else that define the DC community by providing a showcase for our
                    members' research and a venue (both physical and virtual) for discussion,
                    introductions, and the inspiration for new collaborative relationships and
                    projects. The traditional scholarly community would be centred in an institution
                    but here we have a virtual one with a group of people who share the same
                        interests, pursuits, or occupation […] (OED Online s.v. community).
                    Distance is no longer an obstacle and the spatial dimension with a common
                    physical institutional location is no longer needed ; although of course the institutional support is as important as
                    ever. Consequently, it is possible to conceive of a community as more of a
                    symbolic and intellectual construct . The spatial
                    dimension becomes less important and the time factor more so (in the sense of
                    when these seminars occur as they attract a virtual audience as well as a
                    physical one) as the seminars and panels become representative of the DC and the
                    community element becomes a mental construct and one of perception rather than
                    physicality. However, the seminars (and to a lesser extent the conferences) now
                    substitute for that physical presence and give a locational as well as a
                    temporal point of focus. This sense of community at a
                        distance is of great importance and studied much in the area of
                    distance education. See for example: .
                Indeed, community is one of the foundational terms in Social
                    Science and too many attempts to theorise about it in those terms will be
                    avoided here. However, it would be remiss not to at least include a brief
                    mention of Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft, with the
                    former being the strong ties that have become associated with
                        community and the latter the somewhat weaker ties of
                    what could be termed association, and the tension between
                    what could be described as the physical community and one based on occupation or
                    interest; further discussion on this topic should be saved for another paper on
                    Ferdinand Tönnies. However, the point here is that the DC community falls
                    between the two and is neither one nor the other but has some attributes of
                    both. It is fundamentally a community of interest but the seminars and
                    conference panels give the locus and (virtual) physicality and so a
                    strengthening of the bonds. In the sociological sense, a scholarly community
                    might be described as a group who share a common professional interest,
                    communicate and collaborate with each other, but also and importantly identify
                    themselves with the group's goals and values, and experience the feeling of
                    belonging . It is these factors that hold
                    the community together. 
                Examples of this in practice can be seen in many DC publications and research
                    activities. The Introduction to the 2010 volume, mentioned above,
                    self-consciously uses the term community of users to
                    describe the DC as it has become defined by what we (as a community) do
                    and indeed that the unifying agenda of the volume does not depend on any
                    particular technical, methodological or philosophical approach but rather as a
                        community of expertise and practice
                    . This sense of community is a common theme
                    expressed throughout this first print collection of DC papers, whether that be
                    concerning material culture (Heath ch.2), EpiDoc (Tupman ch.4), or the survival
                    of texts (Cayless ch.8). Perhaps the most pertinent is the concluding chapter
                    (Terras ch.10) where Melissa Terras draws together many of the volume's central
                    themes with a focus on interdisciplinary research (and the problems that arise
                    at both an individual and institutional level) which by their nature require
                    participants coming together in communities of practice to achieve their
                    research goals. In the broad spectrum of DC interests (just as in the wider
                    field of DH where we position ourselves) no single person has all the skills
                    that are needed for interdisciplinary working; cooperation and collaboration is
                    needed. 
                This vision of the DC as a community goes beyond theorising
                    and manifests itself in practice. This can clearly be seen in initiatives such
                    as EpiDoc (a sub-set of the TEI and a set of XML standards for the
                        representation of texts in digital form).EpiDoc Sourceforge page
                            http://epidoc.sourceforge.net Again, users of EpiDoc
                    self-identify as a community of practitioners by those who
                    both make use of and teach encoding methods for inscriptions . The same is true of many other DC projects
                    such Perseids (a collaborative editing platform),
                    EAGLE (the Electronic Archive of Greek and Latin Epigraphy) and those involved
                    in documenting cultural heritage; these also self-identify and represent
                    themselves as communities 
                    
                    . Just as the wider DC community, these too
                    can be typified as virtual ones as they also exist without a physical location;
                    yes, there is an institutional site where the server is hosted and maintained
                    but the users and contributors are spread far and wide. This is also true of the
                    wider DH community. This author is Associate Director of the UCL Centre for
                    Digital Humanities (UCLDH) and we are very much a virtual
                        centre; we have signs on our office doors to indicate our
                    affiliation but members of the Management Team are spread across various
                    department in the Arts and Humanities, as well as Computer Science and
                        beyond. UCLDH Management Team: http://www.ucl.ac.uk/dh/people We are a cross-faculty
                    research centre; we share a vision and a taught programme; we put on seminars
                    and other events but we do not have a physical space; we have posters on display
                    but no bricks-and-mortar evidence of our existence. Indeed, we are ourselves
                    part of the wider virtual community of DH centres that is CentreNet.
                        CentreNet: an international network of digital humanities centers:
                            http://dhcenternet.org
                
            

                Sustaining the community
                How might a community such as DC become sustainable when all the members
                    undoubtedly have great pressure on their limited time? As above, the community
                    is mostly identified by what it does and, for the DC, the events more than
                    anything else define the community and provide, along with the wiki, a showcase
                    for members research and a point of focus. For a community, and particularly a
                    virtual one, to flourish members need interaction with the rest of that
                    community and to have a sense of belonging: of being a part of that community.
                    Communication via the Jisc discussion list, coming together for seminars and
                    conferences, both virtually by social media and in person, creates that sense.
                    The common focus supports the sense of belonging and connects with the shared
                    interests and values of members. Debate and discussion follow and the
                    asynchronous medium of the mailing list and wiki allow a democratisation of the
                    discussion process where everyone potentially gets to have their say and is
                    equally valued . This communication opens up
                    possibilities for the sharing of information, knowledge, tools, and advice; the
                    scholarly exchange of expertise and resources given freely here becomes part of
                    a socially organised form of reciprocity such as described by Marcel Mauss who
                    sees this type of sharing as a mechanism to maintain and preserve the social
                    relations within a society and by extension a community . Thus the community is sustained by engaging in the activities that attracted
                    the members to begin with. Members need to feel that they are part of the
                    community, that they have a voice, and most importantly that they are able to
                    have a positive and valuable interaction with other members of the community
                        . In other words this might be reduced down to
                    the simple question: what do the members get out of being part of the community?
                    To be sustained a community must continue to engage its members. 
                In addition, the institutional affiliation needs to be maintained and the DC has
                    been generously funded and supported since its inception by the ICS at Senate
                    House, London (part of the University of London, School of Advanced Study) and
                    they in turn are accountable to their funding bodies. It is therefore important
                    to satisfy basic funding requirements to ensure further support. Our seminars
                    are open and everyone is welcome, from specialist to those with a casual
                    interest; we are part of the ICS's programme of outreach
                    and public engagement; we increase their
                        impact as well as participating in those other
                    activities favoured by funding bodies, knowledge transfer
                    and knowledge exchange. However, the DC goes much further
                    than this as we are part of and participate in networks much wider than the DC
                    such as those of the Digital Humanities and e-Science communities in both the UK
                    and internationally. As evidenced by our Administrators, Partner
                        Institutions, and full DC Community listings http://wiki.digitalclassicist.org/Members Our collective
                    looks outward rather than inward and engages with the wider international
                    community. Indeed, each year our seminars have speakers from outside the UK and
                    Europe as well as international visitors in the audiences. See the seminar
                        listings: http://www.digitalclassicist.org/wip. Full statistics on seminar
                        attendance and website views and downloads from the DC site are collected on
                        behalf of the ICS to allow impact to be measured. These are not currently
                        available although the views and downloads for the DC YouTube channel and
                        SlideShare account (see n.24) are public. Combining these for a longitudinal
                        study of membership and impact is planned. 
                
            

                Reflection
                The emergence of digital scholarship in the humanities has had considerable
                    impact on disciplines such as Classics and the study of the ancient world. The
                    example of the DC is used here to demonstrate the possibilities for
                    collaborative authorship, the creation of reusable research output, the
                    opportunities to add thoughts and comments in the form of annotation, and for
                    bringing people together (both physically and virtually) to facilitate the
                    exchange of ideas. These are all central to building communities of learning and
                    scholarship, but the most important is the exchange of ideas. It is in this way
                    that knowledge grows and we are able to push the boundaries of scholarship. To
                    be clear, this was never, to my knowledge as one of the founders, planned at the
                    outset. Communities grow organically and in response to their members and their
                    members’ interests. It is necessary, of course, to have people who are prepared
                    to commit time and effort in the planning, organisation, development,
                    contribution, and participation. To flourish such a community needs to be
                    community driven and to give members a sense of ownership, where users become
                    contributors and so stakeholders, to be welcoming and inclusive rather than
                    exclusive. This is particularly true of a community that exists for most part at
                    a distance and falls between Gemeinschaft and
                        Gesellschaft. 
                Using the DC as a case study for the development and sustainability of a DH
                    community, what can be learned from these experiences and what could usefully
                    guide other communities? As mentioned above, there was no specific plan for the
                    development of the DC but rather an idea: to form a central hub and bring
                    together researchers and practitioners with common interests. The DC grew in a
                    pragmatic way creating partnerships with an inclusive rather than exclusive
                    vision and this inclusivity allowed for diversity and a widening of the sphere
                    of interests. This is turn brought together a greater variety of people,
                    researchers, practitioners and students to allow a much greater facilitation of
                    cross-disciplinary discussion and possibility of collaborations. This
                    inclusivity is important and something that is fostered for us at DC and within
                    DH more generally. For a virtual community to survive it needs to be outward
                    facing and have a focus; one that is recognisable with branding and outreach,
                    importantly outreach beyond the immediate and obvious community. The DC takes
                    digital humanities to Classics and classics to the Digital Humanities with
                    papers and panels at major classics conferences as well as at digital humanities
                        ones. Examples of DC papers and panels at Classics conferences are
                        given above and for examples of DC at DH conferences, see the papers on
                            Perseids  (Beaulieu et al.), Natural
                        Language Processing (Buchler et al.), Orosius' Histories (Franzini et al.),
                        Recogito 2 (Isaksen et al.) at DH2017 (https://dh2017.adho.org/program/abstracts/); the panel on Linked
                        Ancient World Data (Bodard et al.) as well as papers on EpiDoc (Cummings et
                        al.), Latin dictionary (Litta et al.) (http://dh2016.adho.org/abstracts/).  The established
                    seminar series gives the opportunity for this outreach and the promotion of the
                    organisation, the speakers, their research, the centre or whatever as well as a
                    relaxed opportunity for networking. The inclusivity also encourages the breadth
                    of contributions evidenced by the wide-ranging topics found on the seminar
                        listings. The Digital Classicist seminar page listing seminars, events
                        and peer-reviewed volumes. http://www.digitalclassicist.org/wip/ The DC has robust
                    and effective mechanisms for promotion via mailing lists, discussion fora and
                    social media with an archive of events, presentations and videos on the website.
                    Showcasing publications from the community afford the same opportunities for
                    outreach and promotion. Engaging with other communities facilitates knowledge
                    exchange and transfer. 
                The community begins with a nucleus of willing people which the activities
                    described above allow to develop and grow. More is needed, however, for a
                    virtual community to be sustained and to understand this we need to go back to
                        Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft. With no physical
                    location, the community begins with the weaker ties of interest and association;
                    the locus and point of contact afforded by the seminars and conference
                    participation strengthens those ties but they are not enough. Members need to be
                    involved and have a sense of ownership; they need to be stakeholders – this is
                    what strengthens the ties. The DC Wiki is one showcase for members' research and
                    a point of focus for our virtual community. A new initiative to draw members to
                    this sense of ownership and closer ties is the monthly wiki
                        sprint. The name is derived from the more common
                        'book sprint' and used as a means of collaboratively working towards
                        publication within a short period of time. Digital Classicist Wiki: Wiki
                        editing sprints https://wiki.digitalclassicist.org/Wiki_editing#Wiki_editing_sprints
                    This involves participants coming together for an hour or two to work on
                    improving the content of the DC Wiki; these can be themed sprints or consist
                    simply of going through the pages updating links and content as well as deleting
                    redundant pages. This gives another level of participation for willing members
                    and another opportunity to meet and work together in a virtual environment;
                    there is a Google doc to monitor edits being made and a IRC (Internet Relay
                    Chat) channel for any discussion or questions. This is particularly useful for
                    drawing in members who consider their specific area of interest to be in the
                    minority or under represented amongst the publications, such as Arabic.
                        Dar al-Kutub: Collection of the Egyptian National Library https://wiki.digitalclassicist.org/Dar_al-Kutub:_Collection_of_the_Egyptian_National_Library
                     Members need to be engaged by the community and feel that they are part
                    of it; they must associate themselves and self-identify with the community. It
                    starts with shared interests and values but the successful community needs
                    members (a critical mass) to have the commitment to ensure it is sustained;
                    having a sense of ownership and a stake in this ensures that it will still be
                    around in years to come.
                In any discussion on sustainability, the importance of institutional support
                    cannot be underestimated. The DC has always benefited from the generous support
                    of the ICS along with that of the institutions that employ the organisers. With
                    the ever-increasing pressures of academic and research commitments, for staff,
                    students and practitioners, organisations such as the DC allow the opportunities
                    for outreach and public engagement looked for by promotion and interview panels.
                    Moreover, they go some way to combating the lack of institutional memory by
                    establishing a record of activities, involvement and value in the long term
                    which can then be pointed to should the need arise to justify the time and
                    expense involved. 
            

                Future
                The DC model seems a robust and effective one as, at the time of writing, it has
                    now passed its first decade. But what of the future? We have seminars,
                    conference papers and panels, we have publications, we are developing a
                    substantial archive of contributions, and now our web is spreading further.
                    Presenters at our seminars are now setting up their own networks within which
                    bringing people together both physically and virtually also plays an important
                    role. There is now the Digital Classicist Germany which plans to function as
                        a hub for Digital Classics-related initiatives in Germany. Digital
                        Classicist Germany http://de.digitalclassicist.org/about.html
                     Moreover, the Digital Classicist Berlin launched its own seminar series
                    complete with lecture videos in October 2012 and was they claim, inspired by
                        the ICS London Seminar, with the inaugural keynote presentation given by
                    Gabriel Bodard. Digital Classicist Berlin 2012-2013 seminar programme http://de.digitalclassicist.org/berlin/seminar2012 (accessed
                        24/01/2015) The keynote presentation for the second Berlin series
                    (2013-2014) was given by this author Digital Classicist Berlin 2013-2014
                        seminar programme http://de.digitalclassicist.org/berlin/seminar2013 (accessed
                        24/01/2015) and the 2016-2017 series is (at the time of writing) in
                        progress; Digital Classicist Berlin 2016-2017 seminar programme http://de.digitalclassicist.org/berlin/seminar2016 (accessed
                        07/01/2017) they too are now established and will no doubt grow and
                    continue to thrive. This is indeed an honour and a reflection of the regard in
                    which the DC is held by members (as the Berlin organisers are also DC members)
                    of the international community. In addition, 2012 saw the launch of
                    e-humanities.net at the University of Leipzig and their eHumanities seminars,
                    again modelled on the DC seminar format, where it was a great honour to be
                    invited to give the inaugural talk which is the subject of this paper.2012
                        Leipzig eHumanities Seminar Schedule https://eadh.org/news/2012/05/02/leipzig-ehumanities-seminar.
                        Again, many thanks to Marco Büchler and the seminar organisers for the kind
                        and generous invitation.
                
            

                Coda
                Writing up this talk for publication has allowed much reflection on the past and
                    on the organic development of the DC as a community; it has allowed an
                    evaluation of what is meant by a community and how that might be understood and
                    sustained. Looking to the future it is pleasing to see that the DC has provided
                    inspiration for the development of new seminar series both at Berlin and
                    Leipzig. This is perhaps how we might measure a community and recognise one as
                    such by the extent to which it is regarded by others. 
            
